<!--
.. title: The Art, the Political Conjuncture, and the Left
.. slug: conjuncture
-->

---
lead: This is a text that was originally written for the symposium titled »Perfect Harmony« within the Transitions festival, Athens, November 27–28, 2015, and later re-worked as a response to the [Schlossghost](https://schloss-post.com/art-political-conjuncture-left/) survey on art and politics that the Akademie Schloss Solitude conducted among its fellows.
---

<script type="application/json" class="js-hypothesis-config">

{"showHighlights": false}

</script>

<script src="https://hypothes.is/embed.js" async></script>

## 1. Do I consider my work political?

I was asked to reflect upon my own artistic practice, practice that I
develop with my theater collective BADco., and describe if its political
or not.[^1] To start, I can immediately say that our
work is not directly political. Colleagues in my collective would
probably beg to disagree, yet I’ll explain in what follows why I
hesitate to qualify our work, or indeed many other works that consider
themselves political, as political. What is at stake in my hesitation is
the conceptual demarcation between the art and the politics. If we fail
to properly demarcate the political from the artistic, we risk losing
understanding under what conditions and under what actions art becomes
political.

In parallel to BADco.’s artistic work, it is a fact that we’re
politically situated in a context of struggles in which we actively and
in various guises take part in – a circumstance that we often also
reflect in our artwork. Many of our works have picked up on the issues
and the limits of political imaginary that are formative of our
political context. Our work *Ribcage* was a bitter reaction on the Iraq
war, *1 poor and one 0* speculated on the recent history of
deindustrialization in our postsocialist world, *A Pound of Hysteria,
Acceleration …* operated with the anxieties of middle classes over
proletarianization in the aftermath of 2008, *Responsiblity for Things
Seen* drew on urban contestations in Zagreb and Dubrovnik, *Stranger*
anticipated the Europe’s political turmoil over the recent refugee
crisis.[^2] These are all issues we were or are
active around in one capacity or another, yet there’s always an
indirection at work between the political action and our aesthetic
inquiry. Our work is socially reflexive, yet still not political in and
of their own. Their political content and situatedness still does not
make them political. Therefore, to reach any final judgment, there’s a
number of intermediate steps that need to be considered to come to some
understanding how politics and art relate and fail to relate.

Anyone not having to read the long exposition that follows, can
immediately jump to section 5. For the rest, let’s start from the
immediate context of our work and its operative contradictions. The
immediate production context of our work is Zagreb’s »independent
culture,« comprising actors in art and culture that have emerged largely
from the anti-war and anti-nationalist opposition of the 1990s. Starting
from the embattled context of the 1990s, these organizations have
followed the fast-paced integration of the national war economy into the
international circuits of capital in 2000s by shifting their political
focus from the issue of minority rights (of ethnic minorities, LGBTQ
community, counterculture) to the majority rights (employment, welfare,
public provision of services, labor protections).

In this transition form the 1990s into 2000s a process of progressive
radicalization from the communitarian to the common unfolded. In an
important aspect, the radicalization centered around the contested
colonization of space and built environment as a social resource by
private interests amidst the real-estate book of the first part of the
2000s, which was itself made possible by the privatization of socialist
productive economy and its eventual hollowing-out in the 1990s.
Initially focusing on calling out the local governments over the denial
of access to resources, the »independent culture« first pushed for
preserving spaces that were being rampantly redeveloped and thus
permanently taken away from their potential social use.

However, the failure of this soft politics of advocacy forced it soon to
its focus on broader issues of the »second privatization« of social
resources, driven by land and real estate speculation. This shift led to
a formation of a broad social movement Right to the City Zagreb.
[^3] Between 2006 and 2011, the Right to the City has
organized a cycle of large popular mobilization against the
disenfranchisement of the people of Zagreb in the development of their
city. After that initial period of intense confrontation, the Right to
the City Zagreb turned its attention to various other aspects of
privatization: the land-grab in coastal and agricultural zones, doubling
frequently as golf-course development projects, mounting a first popular
referendum in Croatia with the initiative Srđ je naš! in Dubrovnik;[^4] to the illegal hollowing out of functional
companies for the reasons of monetizing assets, helping for instance the
textile workers of the Kamensko factory;[^5] and
against the austerity-driven 99-year long concession to a private
investor of the national network of highways.

However, for all their putative success, these mobilizations have
frequently raised doubts as to whether they are programmatically
anti-systemic and if they are thus not caught in a cycle they cannot
overcome, regardless how far they manage to grow in scale and
significance. Doubts if there isn’t a disparity between their practical
goals and processes working at the structural level that they fail to
assail. They connect heterogeneous social forces – from
environmentalists, over civil society actors, political liberals,
anarchists, and communists, all the way down to trade unions. They work
with a tactical horizon in mind, articulating the structural processes
and conditions through direct and particular acts of negation. And yet
despite of all those doubts they have had greater effects in defending
the elements of the social system against the capitalist attack than
many other processes of radicalization, with the exception of student
occupations and rare trade-union mobilizations.

So, how to consider this glass ceiling that the contestations face;
seeing the problem in the system, yet not being able to engage it at a
systemic level – and what are the structural conditions of its
confrontation, setting the limits on its space of action? But before we
enter the analysis, let’s state something obvious and yet painful,
something that touches upon the question of perfomativity of politics.

## 2. Performativity of politics and why we live in a troubled attachment to the progressive politics of yesteryear.

We invoke politics and perform political action »as if« the normative
proceduralism of democratic process is in effect. We, not being in
power, are not isolated in this. The opposite side – commanding the
heights of political power – invokes and performs that »as if« as well.
It is in this symmetric commitment to the politics that the
performativity of politics is staged: the game of political pushing and
pulling is performed at a deeper level between the reaffirmation and the
transgression of the political norms.

Accordingly, we see the political cunning, the measure of political
performance, in the capacity to effect both – to invoke the rules, yet
to achieve more than the rules the political game allow. Yet, while this
operation might be symmetric between those who are in power and us who
are not in power, the capacity to effect change through that operation
is all but symmetric. It is not only skewed by the differential of
effective power between the political class and the rest of the society,
but also by the differential of understanding of the effective
*Spielraum* of the political action between one and the other. Those who
partake in the political system are beholden to the art of the possible,
which is nowadays committed to declaring that the historical
achievements of labor struggles, enshrined in welfare provisions, are no
longer tenable, while the rest despair over their desire to hold on to
the good life that is increasingly declared impossible. In the present,
there’s a striking contrast between the neurotic *élan* reassuringly
exuded by the politicos and the antipolitical disenchantment predominant
among the masses.

The reason for the contrast is that the ground of politics has
significantly shifted and contracted. The economic trumps the political
more than ever before in our recent history. While both sides are
invested in the political horizon that no longer holds up to the forms
of transformation with which we used to measure political performance –
be that reform, nonreformist reform or revolutionary politics, that
attachment to the political horizon of yesteryear seems to be
particularly noxious for those who hold on tooth and claw to the old
notion of progressive politics. It results in what Lauren Berlant has
called »Cruel Optimism.«

»Cruel Optimism« a relation of attachment to compromised
conditions of possibility whose realization is discovered either to be
impossible, sheer fantasy, or too possible, and toxic. What’s cruel
about these attachments, and not merely inconvenient or tragic, is that

the subjects who have x in their lives might not well endure the loss of
their object/scene of desire, even though its presence threatens their
well-being, because whatever the content of the attachment is, the
continuity of its form provides something of the continuity of the
subject’s sense of what it means to keep on living on and to look
forward to being in the world. This phrase points to a condition
different from that of melancholia, which is enacted in the subject’s
desire to temporize an experience of the loss of an object/scene with
which she has invested her ego continuity. Cruel Optimism is the
condition of maintaining an attachment to a significantly problematic
object … some scenes of optimism are clearly crueler than others: where
cruel optimism operates, the very vitalizing or animating potency of an
object/scene of desire contributes to the attrition of the very thriving
that is supposed to be made possible in the work of attachment in the
first place.« [^6]

## 3.  This is the defining condition for the Cruel Optimism of the left. The political ground has shifted so dramatically that there is little space left for programmatic progressive politics.

The immediate evidence that the political space has contracted – not
only in terms of political imaginary but in terms of the effect
political space of action – is the fact that winning the elections and
seizing power matters little for reformist change, let alone for
antisystemic politics. Historical reasons are obvious: the transformation
of global capitalist relations since the 1970s and in particular their
deepening after the demise of the socialist project since 1989,
resulting in a highly integrated capitalist world-system, have severed
the immediate link within the borders of national economies between the
reproduction of the capital and the reproduction of the working class.
The capital no longer needs to secure the consent of the working class
by conceding a fair wage and welfare provision. Quite the opposite, the
working class is fully aware it has to renounce the wage and welfare
demands in order to secure the benevolence of the capital. And the
capital knows that the working class knows that too. The global free
trade, relocation of industrial production, production chains spanning
the globe, competition of national monopoly capital in global
competitive markets all have radically restricted the economic policy.
The local and global governance are becoming increasingly integrated in
order to maintain the conditions for accumulation on which the states
depend for their taxation. The political space within the nation-state
is thus much more limited than before, but just as determinant.

In the aftermath of these developments, the political space has not only
been reconfigured in its scope, but also from the inside. The agenda of
the left thus finds itself radically constrained by the exigencies of
accumulation and class recomposition, resulting in the fragmentation of
the workforce and the diminishing effectivity of the wage demand. The
liberal and conservative political forces are better at securing the
conditions for accumulation than the left, as they can better legitimate
to their voters a greater integration into international capital flows
at the price of reduced wages and welfare. They can advocate effective
inequality through equality of opportunities, benefiting particularly
the destabilized middle classes that are at the outset better placed to
seize those opportunities. Or, in the case of conservative forces,
advocate pre-welfarist forms of solidarity – church, family, and charity
– thus acknowledging the worsening situation of the poor and their
growing dependence on those forms. A particular twist to this reordering
of alliances is given by the existence of a welfare system, its
equalizing effect has almost vanished, as those who are better off can
both benefit from the parallel access to the public system and private
services, while the poor are reduced to an increasingly starved public
system.

The resulting political landscape across many countries of the ailing
European periphery thus depends on three factors: the dependence of
capital on local conditions of accumulation, the conditions the state is
able to secure for the accumulation, and the types of social solidarity
that predominate.

## 4. However, behind this shifting political ground a deeper structuring process is at work: the recomposition of class relations with the diminishing effectivity of workplace struggles and growing significance of struggles for social reproduction (thus making it important to differentiate the structural position of a class and its place in the conjuncture of a historical moment).

Revolutionary movements have been able to achieve more where there was a
contested mode of production, be that at the level of a society as in
most of the future socialist countries in the early twentieth century or
at the level of the world-system during the Cold War period. The
potential for progressive structural transformation has been foreclosed
at least since 1989, even in situations of deep structural crisis, such
as the financial shifts unfolding since 2008. As Aaron Benanav and
Joshua Clover have indicated,[^7] even the BRICS
countries have high levels of fragmentation of the workforce and its
subordination to the globally integrated division of labor, with the
implication that the structural conditions for the revolutionary
proletarian transformation are no longer given there either.

In post-Fordist globalization, the reproduction of capital has become
decoupled from the reproduction of the working class. For its
reproduction, the working class depends on the errant capital that can
exploit global divisions of labor and debt-driven growth to divest from
labor’s reproduction. If social reproduction is contested, then it is no
longer the wage-relation and the »hidden abode of production« that is
the privileged site of contestation. This is already clear from the fact
that the attack of recent years has particularly focused on public
services, welfare, education, healthcare – commercializing,
commodifying, privatizing – shifting costs from capital to labor. But
that divestment from the reproduction of labor would not have been
sustainable, had it not been enabled by the replacement of buying power
through wage by buying power through private debt. Thus the working
class finds itself equally under attack as all those who benefited from
the redistributive politics and all those who benefited from the
expansion of credit: students, the unemployed, the indebted. The working
class can exit the capital’s divestment from its reproduction only if it
divests from the conditions that reproduce them as a class.

On the other hand, the increasingly proletarianized middle classes find
themselves in the same contradiction, yet are waiting to be pulled out
of that position by the wind-down of the crisis. The middle classes are
thus an ambivalent element of both political change and political
neutralization, as could be well observed with the social-democrat
middle class constituency in Greece over the last couple of years. Thus,
fundamental to the political struggle against the general tendency
toward structural adjustments and austerity programs becomes the
capacity to seize upon the contradictions between the structural
position of a class and its place in the present historical conjuncture.

To this effect it is important to develop forms of organization of
social forces that are responsive, that are not committed to what social
groups have in common, as they have little in common, but what they can
tactically achieve against the general tendency.

Obviously there are limits to capital’s insouciant strategy of
divestment and debt, this internal contradiction of the system is the
rational kernel of contestations that will perpetuate themselves and
continue to have errant, global outlook.

## 5. Art operates in a field structured and separated by class. Within its structural limits, art can reflect the contradictions and in a conjuncture can act politically in a functional and transitory way.

We tend to easily conflate the political with the attributes of
aesthetic judgment. Espousing politics grants recognition and appraisal
to the work of art. Yet the socially reflective character of an artwork
and its consciously critical position toward the structuring structure
of the social reality that we commonly characterize as political might
not be political at all. Even if the art is socially structured,
situated, and critical, politics remains a separate form of activity,
external to art and operating along a different logic of engagement.
After all, the art is *tehnè*, while the politics is *praxis*. However,
exactly because it is socially structured, situated, and critical, the
art can’t remain outside of the present conjuncture and the ambit of
politics.

Now, the system of cultural production in which the art is embedded is
increasingly structured and separated by class. The economic
restructuring that has flexibilized the working conditions, made a
living wage much more uncertain, reduced youth to unemployment and
brought back premodern forms of solidarity, has reduced it to a
predominantly middle-class affair. Given the ambivalent position of the
middle classes within the political conjuncture, where it is
increasingly in risk of proletarianization, yet it is constantly
striving upward, the cultural system plays a significant role in the
formation of cross-class politics. Art can purposefully and
transformatively reflect and criticize the contradicting commitments of
the middle class and work to create broader understanding and alliances
between the middle and the working class. Art can occupy the liminal
space between the bourgeois public sphere of institutions and the
proletarianized social forces that are being made redundant through the
attack on social reproduction. It can work cross-class and organize
social forces, allying with a broad range of social actors, sometimes
close – sometimes distant. It can also insert itself upwards in the
class structure and economic circuits to critically reveal the
mechanisms that reproduce the social domination.

Yet the precondition for art to be able to enter into an effective
relation with politics is a political radicalization of the existing
social order. Its politicization and its opening up to a possible
reconfiguration is the contextual precondition allowing art’s radical
critique and radical imagination become politically effective. Without
the radicalization of politics the politics of art remains an
implausible possibility, an uncertainty, a contingency in search for a
politics that can instantiate the contextual conditions for its
plausibility.

There’s a deeper reason to this. As Pierre Macherey has noted in *A
Theory of Literary Production*,[^8] the work of art
does not simply reflect the intentions of the author. Rather it reflects
the fact that it is produced under determinate historical and social
conditions structuring both the position of the author and the position
of the reader. The author is thus never in full command of the work nor
do her intentions of this or that kind come off as intended with the
reader. The same goes for the work of art considered political: intended
as a political intervention, an act of defiance or a *pièce de
résistance*, it resigns its immanent ends and aspires to the
truthfulness of statements and political agency lying outside of its
capacity to ascertain them. It necessarily has to concede that the
truthfulness is not a reflection of intentions, that it is external to
the work and conjunctural, so that it always runs the risk of error,
demagogy or tautology. Conditions dictate how it can take a political
effect and speak truth to power.

While the socioeconomic conditions under which it is made are
determinate, an artwork can never rely on achieving determinate effects
from understanding them and acting purposefully in them. Even when they
intentionally decide to deal with the determinate conditions of
production, the authors, and their intentions continue to be
conditioned, formed, and misformed by the fantastic (in the Marxian
sense) realm of socioeconomic determinations. And yet, in the moments of
political radicalization, the works can take on a political orientation,
something that Brecht has called »function.«[^9] In
that process, they take upon themselves the task of responding to the
exigencies of political process of social transformation and thereby
functionally transform their own initial conditions of production. Art
thus becomes political action. It assumes a transient, political
character, lasting for as long as radicalization lasts.


[^1]: This is a reworked version of the talk delivered at the symposium titled »Perfect Harmony« within the Transitions festival, Athens, November 27–28, 2015.
[^2]: https://badco.hr/works/
[^3]: http://pravonagrad.org/, http://the-archipelago.net/2015/11/05/iva-marcetic-the-right-to-the-city-zagrebs-spatial-politics/
[^4]: http://srdjenas.com](http://srdjenas.com/
[^5]: http://praksa.hr/kamensko/
[^6]: Lauren Berlant, »Cruel Optimism,« in: Gregg, Melissa, and Gregory J. Seigworth, *The Affect Theory Reader,* Durham 2010, p. 94.
[^7]: Joshua Clover and Aaron Benanav, “Can Dialectics Break BRICS?,”
    *South Atlantic Quarterly* 113, no. 4 [September 21, 2014]: 743–59.
[^8]: Pierre Macherey, *A Theory of Literary Production,* 1978.
[^9]: Walter Benjamin, *Understanding Brecht* \[New Edition\], 2003.
