<!--
.. title: Bordering, Social Choegraphy and Transmodernity: Dance Beyond Capitalist Modernity
.. slug: bordering
-->

---
lead: This is a revised version of a talk delivered at the Tanzkongress in Hannover, 18 June 2016.
---

<script type="application/json" class="js-hypothesis-config">

{"showHighlights": false}

</script>

<script src="https://hypothes.is/embed.js" async></script>

## Argument in brief

In this analysis I’ll situate the emergence of dance as an art form
within the geo-historical trajectory of political bordering process in
the 18th and 19th century Europe. I'll suggest that with the rise of
capitalist modernity, which ushered in both the bourgeois nation-states
as a form of internal social regulation and the imperialism as a form of global economic expansion, the dance gradually differentiated itself out as a separate artistic field. In its evolving focus on composing collective movement of freely expressive bodies, it reflected four structural aspects of the rapidly maturing capitalism: nominal equality of all members of the society, subjection of bodies to the industrial process of production, abstract mediation of social relations through commodity exchange, and gradual exclusion of pre-modern routines, gestures and rituals from the capitalist organization of life.

These four aspects would become both emphatically encapsulated in
popular social dances and, relevant for the analysis here,
symptomatically encapsulated in dance as an art form. Against the
backdrop of these constitutive aspects of capitalist society, dance's
concern with the composition of collective movement, freely expressive
bodies unfettered from social coercion, abstract dance relieved of
conventions and pursuit of cultural difference provided at once a
representation and a performance of social relations: an embodied
expression of bourgeois ideology of freedom and spontaneity of dynamic
social relations – and thus a form of “social choreography”. It is
within these registers that dance’s socially reflexive, ambivalent and
potentially critical capacity had resided.

However, from this close relation to capitalist modernity follows that
in the geo-historical contexts where the capitalist development was
stunted by socialist revolution or subjected to imperial conditions,
dance as an art form did not undergo the comparable process of
constitution as it did in the West, but rather followed different
trajectories. Using the example of post-socialist semi-periphery of
Croatia, I'll show that even the transfer of organizational forms that
define dance as an artistic field in its Western tradition does not lead
to uniform developments, and thus that the modern and contemporary
dance's dominant modes of presentation, techniques and discourse are
neither general nor generalizable. They are rather “provincially”
Western.

Still the non-Western contexts themselves are not, particularly not
after 1989, outside of capitalist modernity. They operate within it,
assimilating its forms and being assimilated by its forms. But they also
operate outside of it, drawing on the endogenous artistic traditions and
forms of critical rationality. The two modernities are thus different,
but viewed from a longer historical perspective, proposed by certain
schools of historical analysis, are part of the combined process of
trans-modernity.

The parallel operation of capitalist and non-capitalist modernities is
nowadays not reserved only for the periphery. At a moment when the
sphere of labor no longer guarantees social integration and when
underemployment and social insecurity are becoming a shared condition
across societies with various levels of economic development, the
condition of two modernities is in evidence in the post-industrial
societies of the capitalist core. Stable industrial labor vis-à-vis
which dance as an artistic field constituted itself is a thing of the
past and this is reflected in how the field has been transforming over
the last twenty years – de-constructing its traditional forms of
artistic representation and forms of institutional reproduction. To
conclude, it is an increasingly convergent trans-local condition that
sets a new horizon allowing us to think the future of dance beyond its
wedlock to capitalist modernity.

## Bordering as a frame of analysis

It is only recently that the political space has become defined by
stable national borders. Borders have solidified into geopolitical
boundaries of national territories only with the demise of the
interlocking regime of large empires and fragmented feudal fiefdoms.
This process of solidification didn't start in Europe before the signing
of Westphalian treaties – and as late as the second half of the 20th
century across the post-colonial world. Borders are today regarded – at
least in international law, if not in political practice – subject to
legitimate change only by self-determination or international
agreements.

Yet with the stability of national borders becoming a norm, borders have
transformed into a flexible regime of governance: no longer running
simply along the lines of separation between sovereign territories,
borders now operate across the entire political territory as multiple
institutional and symbolic mechanisms of control, regulating economic
flows and differential inclusion of populations. As Sandro Mezzadra and
Brett Neilson argue in their study *Border as Method*,[^1] the growing
internalization of bordering capacity to integrate and separate, to
include and exclude, goes hand in hand with a process of economic
expansion. A stable boundary implies an advancing frontier. National
re-territorialization implies global de-territorialization. Thus, the
border system between European nations didn't emerge without the
colonial frontier expanding across the rest of the world. The
disaggregation of national border systems into multiple forms of
institutional regulatory control over the flows of labor, goods and
capital didn't emerge without capitalist frontier penetrating deep into
para-capitalist societies across the world. Migrant labor is at once
absorbed within the national borders and excluded from claim to rights.
Refugees are both welcomed and cordoned-off, subject to humanitarian aid
and allowed to let drown.

While principally regulating economic and population flows, the
bordering processes are overdetermined by symbolic and normative
functions, reproducing the classist, ethnic, gendered, racial, sexual,
cultural, ableist and religious identities and separations. These
identitarian elements have their embodied dimensions. Workers demanding
their right to fair compensation or unionization are decried for souring
the business climate and competitive position of the economy. Women are
relegated to a reserve army of labor and encouraged to stick with the
child bearing and rearing. The disabled are institutionally patronized
in order not to demand right not to work. The immigrant populations are
racialized and ghettoized in order to consent to their precarity.

Whilst the territorial borders still continue to exist, the bordering
processes reach deep into societies, and work deep into the minds and
bodies of non-citizens and citizens alike. They operate at various
scales, from geopolitical to micropolitical to embodied, to enable the
expansion of the economic frontier and the reproduction of the statist
regime that facilitates that expansion. Yet, struggles to unveil the
process of bordering, to organize across the separations of language,
race, religion or gender, to halt their dis-empowering effect are a
strong vector of political subjectivation and agency, one that I'll
return to later in the conclusion.

Dance as a distinct art form emerged with the rise of capitalist
modernity in Europe in the 18th and 19th century, a period that saw both
bourgeois nation-state and national economy establish themselves as
dominant modes of social control and economic regulation. With the
industrialization that soon followed, the fundamental regulatory
mechanism of that joint formation became inclusion and exclusion from
the sphere of productive labor, internalizing bordering process deep
within the territory of society and radically re-configuring all other
separations of privilege and disadvantage, domination and subordination.
It is against this geo-historical context that dance consolidated into
an artistic field. However, the context still does not clarify the
structural imbrication of dance with capitalist modernity.

## Social Choreography and Productive Labor

Aesthetic forms stand in a relation of co-constitution with structures
of social relations and institutional forms they assume. They are
foundational for our orientation and agency as they provide us with a
shared scheme of representation of our social reality. According to
Andrew Hewitt,[^2] it is dance that holds a position of privilege in
crystallizing that shared scheme of representation in the period of
early capitalist modernity: dance is a collective and performative
practice that both allows spectators to observe the complexity of
dynamic social relations and allows participants to experientially
integrate that complexity of social interplay.

Starting from the analysis of Schiller's appreciation of English dances,
where all social ranks are equally allowed to participate in the
choreography and hence equally represent the totality of that movement,
Hewitt detects a historic turning point in the late 18th century where
dance acquires a socially general character: it stops being either a
representation of courtly decorum or an emphatic exercise of popular
ritual, and becomes a vessel for spontaneous ideology of bourgeois
society driven by norms of social mobility, equality and freedom. From
that point on, the representation of social dynamic whole and
participation in its collective performance, that which Hewitt calls
“social choreography”, acts as an organizing principle of both popular
social dances, which soon become subsumed under the logic of
entertainment, and dance as an art form, which slowly develops into an
autonomous artistic field concerned with choreographic exploration of
body and movement – the separation between the two no longer structured
by social stratification, but rather by separation between the
commodified and non-commodified spheres of social production.

Whilst popular dances will have to remain outside of the scope of
present analysis, the privileged position of dance as an art form within
capitalist modernity and its performance of bourgeois ideology are in
need of further specification. There are several other processes that
come to define its nexus to capitalist modernity as they both mature
into the 20th century. Firstly, it extracts the body and movement from
the sphere of industrial production, where these are subsumed under the
dictate of productivity. Secondly, it dematerializes the product, thus
operating in analogy with the abstract mediation of social relations
through commodity exchange and cash nexus. The former finds its
expression in modern dance's lasting focus on freely expressive body and
movement, the latter in its lasting focus on abstract composition. Thus
extracted and abstracted, it becomes fixed on “transcendental
subjectivity \[of the dancer(s)\] instead of social and political
intersubjectivity” that dominates the relations of production –
including its own.[^3]

Thirdly, by differentiating itself from the sphere of productive labor,
where machinic choreography of industrial production subsumes the body
and movement to the maximization of surplus value, the modern dance
starts to constitute its autonomous field around the logic of
choreographic exploration of body and movement, their compositional,
kinesthetic and expressive capacities. This autonomy, which will
gradually become instituted into a full-fledged artistic field,
encompassing constitutive aspects such as dance techniques,
choreographic schools, dance ensembles and hierarchical structures of
production, will enable modern dance to build its own formal language
and reflexive structures, allowing it to fully emancipate itself from
the courtly decorum of the Italian stage and conventions of ballet.

Fourthly, while the movements of manufacturing machinery
instrumentalized the movement of the workers, the movement of dancing
bodies was produced out of creative self-causation. It is in that
immanent free movement of dancing bodies, liberated from the external
necessity of labor, that the fundamental ideological operation of modern
dance unfolds – a vitalist “synthesis of the body and movement”[^4] –
where either the movement of the body is a singular expression of
subject's inner experience or the body is a crystallization of a
singular inner impulse to movement. “Movement becomes ontologically
bound to the body”.[^5]

Sixthly, the exceptionalism of the dancing body gives it freedom to
assume an exploratory and transformative relation to various existing
kinesthetic registers: gestural or quotidian comportments that
increasingly become governed by the modern organization of life and
commodified consumption or ritualistic, spiritual and folkloric
practices that increasingly become suppressed from the modern world as
its exotic other. Difference and otherness as opposed to uniformity and
identity thus become a lasting commitment. Reacting to the dualisms
between work and leisure, dependency and freedom from work, corporeal
and spiritual, manual and intellectual that are characteristic of the
process of capitalist modernity, modern dance embraces spiritual
practices that prime the body and spirit of the dancer to the
requirements of artistic expression.

Finally, while modern dance establishes and maintains a critical tension
to the sphere of labor and capitalist modernization, work ethics
nonetheless finds its way into dance in the form of techniques which
subject the dancing body to strenuous practice, disciplining it to
achieve mastery and virtuosity of performance. In fact, while
competition in the labor market requires from the worker to maintain the
capacity to labor – meaning her strength, her health, her sanity – the
dancer becomes the epitome of the power to endure and to transform.
Nowhere is the political unconscious of dance art more clearly expressed
than in the ableist spectacle of self-transformation achieved through
self-disciplining: a dancing body is a negation of laboring body, but at
the same time its purest crystallization. An ideal laboring body, yet
withdrawn from the process of production.

## Dance in the Periphery and the Illusions of “Developmentalism”

The constitutive withdrawal of the body and movement from the industrial
process of production sheds light on why the interruption in the
development of modern dance that was brought about by the socialist
revolution is not simply a case of stunted modernization, but a
different trajectory of development. Not a derailing or aberration, but
an altogether different formation. Socialist revolutions have all taken
place in countries where capitalist modernization was in its early
stages and the social mass of bodies was still not subjected to the
exigencies of the industrial process of production. Thus, parallel shock
brought about by a rapid socialist modernization that mobilized masses
of producers into a collective undertaking of constructing a new
society, a constructivist merging of productive and social life,
precluded dance art from forming as an autonomous field.

Rather than constituting and instituting itself as an autonomous field
of choreographic inquiry, at whose center stood the transcendental
subjectivity of the dancer, dance as an art form developed either in
dialogue with ballet, musical theater, or more contemporary art forms
such as film or performance – or as representational forms of collective
choreography such as *slet*. While dance thus developed as an
undercurrent through and in dialogue with other forms, the modern dance
proper mostly appeared as a continuation of vestigial forms of
rudimentary bourgeois culture or direct borrowing from the capitalist
center without opportunity for adequate institutional anchoring.

Consider post-socialist Croatia. Over the last eight years the dance
field in Croatia has made huge inroads in achieving what are perceived
to be institutional milestones of a fully constituted autonomous
artistic field within a national culture: it got its national dance
center with the opening of Zagreb Dance Center, separate funding under
the Cultural Commission for Drama and Dance Art at Ministry of Culture,
and Dance Education Program at the Zagreb Academy of Dramatic Arts.
Although the Dance Center is not officially a national dance center, the
Commission doesn't have ample funds to help develop the field, and the
Dance Program is struggling with insufficient faculty and support, these
are typical institutional forms that serve the reproduction of a
discipline. Thus it would seem that the dance has completed the
paradigmatic passage from an unacknowledged and marginalized art form
into an institutionally differentiated field such as it exists across
the cultural systems of developed liberal capitalist countries in the
West, where modern and contemporary dance have after all emerged in what
is assumed their paradigmatic form.[^6] With that, the process of
belated modernization on the periphery, only temporarily interrupted by
alternative socialist modernization, would have seemingly reached its
consummation.

This schematic narrative of development path of dance as an artistic
field implicitly dominates the self-understanding in the field. Its
actors, who are understandably pursuing the “boundary-work” necessary
for their field to achieve the desired recognition, frequently argue
from a perspective of institutional underdevelopment of the cultural
system and its lagging behind other, mostly West European contexts.
There the dance is truly recognized as an art form, holds a position of
prominence in the cultural system and has all the support structures
needed to achieve significance in the national and international
cultural context. The underlying argument here – the catching-up
argument purporting that “if this or that institutional prerequisite is
fulfilled, our artistic field can achieve the same level of development
it has in this or that milieu” – relies on assumptions of linear
development that reduce the historical process in a deterministic and
teleological way.

Yet, these actors are frequently confronted with the experience that the
introduction of an institutional solution fails to achieve comparable
effects as elsewhere – dance center is not functioning as a national
dance center, separate funding is inadequate to the potential the field
holds, the academic program cannot offer all of the benefits such
programs have in “more developed” contexts. This experience reflects the
fact that the evolutionary processes cannot be transplanted from one
socio-political context to another, nor can the introduction of
institutional solutions bring the evolution of a certain context from
one stage into another. That which we consider as belated and troubled
process of catching-up is nothing else than a transfer of institutional
forms into a context where the structure of social relations and already
existing organizational forms provide different affordances and
different resistances to a transplanted form than its original
context.[^7]

## Crisis of Labor and Crisis of Dance

The demise of two competing regimes within the world-system after the
fall of socialism and the opening of China has seen the capitalist
relations become uncontested, the division of labor global, the social
inequality deeper. The flexibilization and proletarianization of the
working class are a predominant social fact. If the sphere of productive
labor and labor market provided the integrative mechanism of industrial
capitalism, the modern dance has built its autonomy vis-à-vis that exact
mechanism - and the post-modern dance has questioned that autonomy. Yet
today, with the advanced de-industrialization in the capitalist core,
high levels of unemployment and prevalent unstable employment, the
socially integrative role of labor is crumbling away. And as its
crumbling away, so is the constitutive relation of dance vis-à-vis the
sphere of productive labor becoming troubled.

If flexibility, adaptability and malleability of capacity to labor have
become a general requirement for survival in the labor market, the
border running between the subsumed body and the free body has become
unsettled. Not only is the self-transformative laboring body of a dancer
demanded of everyone, but the prevalent condition of the uncertainty of
employment and multiple careers are more than ever a lot of a growing
global dancing community. The logic of inner differentiation built
around the axis heteronomy and autonomy of body is thus crumbling away.
The laboring body is increasingly enjoined to be free and enterprising,
while the dancing body increasingly demanded to show itself laboring to
justify its privilege to free exploration.

But the crumbling-away of the constitutive relation of dance to labor
sediments in various other aspects through which the dance field
reproduces itself. As the number of trained dancers increases, the
apprenticeship under a master choreographer becomes rare, the employment
at a dance ensemble for most unlikely, the fragmentation and competition
more expressed. Dancers surf between performing for many and making
their own choreographic work; acquiring the broadest range of techniques
and developing their own post-technique practices; scraping by and doing
odd jobs on the side, producing small works, doing workshops and
residencies and rarely reaching stability.

As a reflection of this a crisis of labor that is also crisis of dance,
since the end of the 1990s the development of contemporary dance,
primarily in what is known as conceptual dance or choreographic theater,
is marked by upending of conventions of the theatrical representation
and suspension of ontological identity between the body and movement.
The performative formats seek to step outside of the scopic regime of
theatrical stage, where the totality of choreographic relations is made
transparent, and seeks other dispositives of encounter. Production
formats are becoming fluid, smaller and transformed into education,
exhibition or residency. Dance seems no longer able or willing to uphold
a position of privilege as an aesthetic form that provides a
representation and experiential integration of bourgeois ideology
dominating the present.

## “Provinciality” of Dance in the Western Tradition and the Trans-Modern
Condition

If the geographic and historical emplacement of modern and contemporary
dance in the context of capitalist modernity holds up to scrutiny, then
we have to acknowledge that its canonical story of development, that its
grandmistresses and grandmasters and its institutional framing are not a
general condition of dance in the modernity nor are they generalizable
to other contexts. There's more to the story of dance and modernity than
the “provincial” story of dance in the Western tradition and its
Romantic epistemology. There’s an untold story of being within and
outside of capitalist modernity, undercutting the dominant structure of
bordering within the world-system.

Post-colonial and post-socialist peripheries (although the notion of
periphery might be not the appropriate notion here, as it still – to
speak with Walter Mignolo[^8] – falls squarely within the frame of
conversation privileging the West), operate within capitalist
world-system and its rationality. Yet, comparable to revolutionary
anti-capitalist forces in the core, they operate within and outside of
it – drawing from their own endogenous artistic traditions, frames of
conversation and forms of critical rationality.

Rather than assuming that the dance outside of the Western tradition
should be either its transplant or its exoticized other, we need to
acknowledge that the Western dominance in general is part of a larger
historical process of modernity that pre-dates and post-dates Western
capitalist modernity. It both includes the long durée of Greek thought
that is passed down through the Islamic Golden Age to the Iberian
Peninsula and from there to the Netherlands and into the early
capitalism and to Latin America and into the colonial conquest. And it
includes the contributions, enabling conditions and the political
challenges that European powers faced from Asian empires. This
development of modernity has grown to engulf almost the entire world in
the present and defines an uneven, yet combined and shared condition
where different critical rationalities obtain vis-a-vis instrumental
rationality of capitalist modernity. This is a historical development
Enrique Dussel calls trans-modernity.[^9]

A historical singularity of trans-modernity is thus a parallel existence
of forms of contemporary dance alongside the alternative forms that
capture social choreographies characteristic of the peripheries of the
world-system. Yet still, the register of inherited forms, be they in the
Western tradition or outside of it, although still operative today, are
no longer sufficient to do justice the changing conditions within the
context of the global division of labor. The crisis of the dance as an
art form is an opportunity neither to settle with the process of
capitalist modernization nor its subaltern other, but to open up an
opportunity for a new body, new movement and new choreography that will
claim a position of distance, a position of sociality, a position of
solidarity, transgressing the lines of separation in the global
borderscape.

\* \* \*

In *The Eastern Mediterranean and the Making of Global Radicalism
1860-1914*,[^10] Ilham Khuri-Makdisi traces back the singular role that
the social ferment of Eastern Mediterranean's nodal cities of Beirut,
Cairo and Alexandria played in the articulation of universalist
anti-imperialism. That universalist anti-imperialism emerged from the
encounter in those cities of migrant workers arriving from the rural
hinterland, itinerant anarchists and socialists arriving from Europe,
diasporic post-Nahba intellectuals arriving mostly from Syria.
Periodicals, books, translations, reading rooms, conferences and – last
but not least – theater stagings had created networks of dissemination
and popularization of radical ideas and forms of agency such as
mutualism, socialism and anti-colonialism that were synchronous and
interbreeding across both sides of the Mediterranean and beyond in
Americas and Asia.

While the sea is seemingly the least bordered expanse of Earth,
connecting radicals in faraway ports, it can be both – as we're
witnessing in the present – the advancing frontier and the forbidding
fortification. Both the trade routes sustaining vital interests of
nations and the peril for people pushed from their lands by war, dearth
and environmental degradation. It was across this Mediterranean
geography that the trans-modernity resonated as the chapter was closing
on the British hegemony of the imperial world, now it is again the same
lands and the same sea that enjoins us to discover a different
modernity, so we can work to close the chapter on the present hegemony
of the capitalist world.

[^1]: Sandro Mezzadra and Brett Neilson, *Border as Method, Or the
    Multiplication of Labor* (Duke University Press, 2013).

[^2]: Andrew Hewitt, *Social Choreography: Ideology as Performance in
    Dance and Everyday Movement* (Duke University Press, 2005).

[^3]: Ibid., 3.

[^4]: Bojana Cvejić, *Choreographing Problems: Expressive Concepts in
    European Contemporary Dance and Performance* (Palgrave Macmillan,
    2015), 16.

[^5]: Ibid., 33.

[^6]: The idea that modern and contemporary dance are formations
    specific to liberal democracies, while dance as an art form followed
    an altogether different development path in the socialist East was
    the foundational idea of East Dance Academy, a joint project by
    performing arts journals *Frakcija, Maska* and *The Walking Theory.*
    Janez Janša clarifies that idea in *Frakcija*, no. 51–52 (2009).

[^7]: It thus comes as no surprise that, as of this writing in 2017, the
    Zagreb Dance Center, due to the fact that the Zagreb mayor has
    annexed it to a larger city theater, is in imminent danger of being
    lost for the dance field. Nor that the continuity of financing
    seemed at risk as a radical right government assumed power in
    Croatia in early 2016. At least that government’s term in office was
    short lived.

[^8]: Walter D. Mignolo, “Epistemic Disobedience, Independent Thought
    and Decolonial Freedom,” *Theory, Culture & Society 26*, no. 7–8
    (December 1, 2009): 159–81, doi:10.1177/0263276409349275.

[^9]: Enrique D. Dussel, “Transmodernity and Interculturality: An
    Interpretation from the Perspective of Philosophy of Liberation,”
    *Transmodernity : Journal of Peripheral Cultural Production of the
    Luso-Hispanic World*, 1, no. 3 (2012): 28–59.

[^10]: Ilham Khuri-Makdisi, *The Eastern Mediterranean and the Making of
    Global Radicalism 1860-1914* (University of California Press, 2010).
