<!--
.. title: Civil Society and Political Work on the Left
.. slug: the_left
-->

---
lead: A talk delivered at the conference *Predicaments of the Left - Conjunctures, Strategies, Perspectives* organized by the [Centre for Labour Studies](http://radnickistudiji.org), 17-19 October 2013, Goethe-Institut, Zagreb.
---

<script type="application/json" class="js-hypothesis-config">

{"showHighlights": false}

</script>

<script src="https://hypothes.is/embed.js" async></script>


Let me begin by looking at the history of the predicament on the left in Croatia and voicing an opinion that some in this round probably won't agree with. And I'm happy to discuss, as my arguments here are
admittedly more of an experiential character and crudely pragmatical
rather than well researched or scholarly. I'm neither expert in matters
of organizational form of the left, nor in matters of understanding the
civil society, nor in matters recent history. I was asked by the
organizers, whom I thank for their invitation and friendly
encouragement, to present on this topic as a continuation of some
previous informal discussions. Therefore, please take the arguments that follow as potentially mistaken and hopefully polemical.

## Understanding the predicament of the left, in retrospect

Harsh judgments have recently been passed on the role of leftist civil
society organizations have played in the processes of social
transformation in Croatia over the last two-three decades. Judgments
that are in part warranted, in part mistaken. And that can probably be
best understood as a work of ideological resetting on the left. The
narrative goes along these lines: civil society initiatives and
organizations of the 90s and early 00s have provided legitimation for
the implementation of liberal reforms that once in place obfuscate the
structural violence of capitalism behind the painfully achieved standard
of liberal proceduralism. Transfixed by the violence of war, ethnic
conflict and nationalist chauvinism, they remained focused on the
aberrations of local flavors of capitalism in the guise of tycoons,
cronyism and criminal aspects of privatization, while remaining blind to
the violent and aberrant character of the capitalism as a system
premised on exploitation. Ultimately, they served as a handmaiden in the
process of replacement of the local criminal capitalist class with the
less individual, more abstract and more civilized forms of international
corporate and financial capital, helping the liberal comprador
bourgeoisie displace the crony nationalist bourgeoisie that carried out
the work of primitive capitalist accumulation of the first moment.

While these recriminations do serve the purpose of drawing the
ideological faultlines between the positions on the left - or if you
prefer, between the positions of the left from the liberal left - and
cause some ideological soul searching, they are not entirely true as
they misconstrue a specific historic evolution of liberalism that the
local political and economic system is nowadays embedded in. Admittedly
though, the assumptions behind these recriminations probably do help us
to understand the present moment and the dominant mindset of many among
even progressive organizations, in so far as they schematically
delineate the structural position of civil society in a liberal
capitalist context. That position is defined by the 'division of labor'
in capitalist democracies between the three sectors of the society,
where the remit of civil society is dictated from without by the state
and/or the capital. Whatever civil society can achieve happens with the
kind permission of those two. Hence, civil society on its own does not
hold the capacity to transform the social dynamic, but it serves as a
corrective and structurally absorbs its contradictions.

But the said harsh judgments fail to understand the specific driving
forces behind the evolution of political and economic liberalism in
Croatia. Stating it bluntly, the liberal capitalism was part and parcel
of the nationalist program to start with. Also the transformation and
privatization of the productive sector were sanctified by the same
ideological ferment that pushed the society into the monoethnic
nation-state. The roots of this ideological ferment can be traced back
to the late Yugoslav period, where a general feeling of discontent with
the economic and political system, caused by a hard and protracted
economic crisis that started in the late 60s or early 70s, was
wide-spread among broad segments of the society. By the end of the 80s,
particularly after the failure of Ante MarkoviÄ‡'s structural adjustment
program and with ethnic tensions already at a boiling point, the
overriding popular sentiment was that the Yugoslav social and economic
model had failed. Many were ready to bail out on Yugoslavia as it was.
And the nationalists provided the quick and dirty way out of that
turmoil. This resignation can help explain the blank slate consent that
broad segments of the society had given to the potent admixture of
nationalism and capitalism.

But the important point is this: it was the self-same historic actors,
who would shortly thereafter go on to transform the nascent nationalism
and nascent capitalism into war and accumulation by dispossession, that
paid the lip service to the liberalism and to a degree even put its
institutional foundations in place. In fact, their own deeds would
paradoxically fail on the liberal standards that they themselves have
promulgated - an insight that was voiced by the perplexed Andrija
Hebrang couple of years ago when expressing his wonderment at the fact
that it is them who have created the Croatian state that are now being
criminalized by the state they themselves have created. But the
liberalism that was part and parcel of their nationalist program was not
there for reasons of organic complementarity with their nationalist
ideology. Rather it was a standard element in the reformist narratives
of the late Yugoslav period that desperately sought and could not come
up with an alternative model to capitalist democracy to salvage at least
some elements of the Yugoslav social and economic exception. The
nationalist embraced the liberalism exactly because it was an already
existing part of the popular imaginary of social transition. A vessel
that allowed them to come to power and follow through their program.
It's a complex historical evolution, but obviously liberalism was more
than merely an oppositional project of progressives and professional
elites that was installed only once the nationalists and their cronies
were out of the game or a set of disciplining measures forced upon them
by the international community. In a way, it remains the intellectual
task for the left to provide a plausible historical narrative for the
Yugoslav dissolution and to disentangle the civil and social rights from
their corporatist nationalist and possessive individualist trajectories.

That work of disentanglement will probably also have to give an account
of the other factors that have led to the lasting turmoil of the left
since the 90s and the predicaments it faces today. Let me briefly
mention a few that bear significance for my debate later. First and
foremost, the abandonment of the Yugoslav social and economic model by
the Communist Party. Having found themselves on the defensive facing the
processes of dissolution and the rise of nationalism, the Croatian
Communists, for instance, have completely abdicated from the political
power, ceding the political territory to nationalists fair and square.
Another important factor was either the dismantling or marginalization
of the relatively progressive institutional framework that existed in
Yugoslavia, particularly in the field of organized labor, youth and
culture. The exception was social institutions and protections that were
left partially intact to buffer off the adverse effects of nationalist
and capitalist offensive. The left has entered the 90s without the
organization and the institutions.[^1]

So - to summarize - the impediments that the left in the 90s, whatever
was there was of the left in the 90s, was forced to regroup and work
under were: the withdrawal of the support for the anti-capitalist
project both by the broad segments of the society and the ruling elites,
the transformation of property relations, the short shrift given to the
pluralist composition of Yugoslav society and the ensuing war, the
foreclosure of the left and the dismantling of its institutional
foundations. Except for the trade unions, hurt by convertism and initial
disorientation; rare beleaguered academic institutions, mostly in the
humanities; and several independent media outlets, it could only have
sought to continue to function outside of the state, the market and the
party. This also set the clear limits on the left, now working within
the civil society - it was marginal, oppositional, anti-populist and
modernist. It mostly focused on the brutal exclusions created by the war
and privatization or picked up the work from the dismantled progressive
institutions of the system. It was reduced to appellative politics and
struggling to find resources for its own work. Going back to the harsh
judgment leveled against the civil society on the left that I've started
from: all this doesn't fully absolve it from the critique, it did settle
within the limits tolerated by the state and the market, particularly as
we go more and more into the 00s, but does point to where the continuity
of the structural predicament of doing the work on the left still lies
today. So let me turn to:

## Understanding the predicament of the left, as currently functioning within limits of civil society

Much has changed since the latter part of the 90s, when my organization
started to work. There has been a wide-spread revival and acceptance of
the anti-systemic analysis and several large-scale anti-systemic
movements. Furthermore, the institutional landscape, particularly the
public broadcasting service and trade unions, have opened up to the
positions of the left. Some on the left are even trying to penetrate the
structures of existing parties or are considering entering the fray of
electoral politics with new projects. But for many on the left working
within forms and formats of organized civil society remains an objective
circumstance under which they have to reproduce and sustain their
political work in the coming future.

Assuming that we do want to transcend the limited remit of civil
society, constrained by the state on the one and the capital on the
other hand, in the remaining talk I will try to focus in more detail on
the constraints and challenges that follow from the objective
circumstance of working within civil society in the present moment in
Croatia: challenges that have to do with the organizational form,
conditions of labor, operative dynamics, media and finally broader set
of strategies that I think are needed to lead us out of the defensive
that in spite of the changing landscape still we still find ourselves
in. On the risk of sounding aseptic and bureaucratic, I will try to look
at things from a more pragmatic side of tasks that lie ahead.

*a) deficits of organizational form*

Self-organization admittedly allows for a lot of maneuvering space, as
one is responsible primarily to one's own purposes and fellow comrades.
There are few limitations set by the institutional arrangement of an
association and few interests to negotiate. Collective action can unfold
quickly without the complicated processes of deliberation and balancing
of opposing views. However, this tactical facility comes at a price.
Weak institutional constraints and lack of potentially paralyzing rank
and file also indicate that the organization has a weak leverage on the
context and lacks the support of broader social forces, a base that will
back up its political activities.

In that respect, civil society organizations stand in contrast to trade
unions. While the capacity of trade unions to react is often slow
because it requires the coordination of the rank and file, once the
industrial action has been agreed upon it has a broad union membership
to back it up and can easily succeed. At the same time, due to the
deindustrialization, bleeding of membership, compartmentalization of
union work into single trades and hawkish media reporting, trade unions
have very limited political maneuvering space. While they can negotiate
the material conditions for their members, it is rarely that they have
the mandate and the strategy to transcend the struggle for immediate
demands of their membership. The importance of the struggle for wages
and better conditions or against bad labor legislation cannot be
overstated. But it rarely can succeed in transcending that narrow scope
and overturning the overriding political dynamics.

Unlike trade unions, the political parties of the left (although in
Croatian parliamentary landscape neither the Social Democrats nor the
Labor strictly speaking deserve that qualifier) are more and more
resembling civil society organizations. Their membership has dwindled
too and they no longer have the broad political base and social
constituencies that would dictate the political orientation from the
bottom up and that they would be in turn held accountable to. When in
power, they no longer pursue a political strategy, but are reduced to a
technique of governance over the social and economic affairs that is
primarily driven by the approval rates and extra-democratic alliances
with media, capital and international institutions. Entrenched positions
in the party reflect more the interests of middle and top party ranks
than that of broad social constituencies. And while some positions in
the party might be more germane to the interests of various social
groups it purports to represent, on the whole it remains volatile and
dependent on the sway of public opinion. This is a condition, in some
quarters also known as a post-political condition, that is shared by
most of the social democratic and older parties of the left in Europe
today.

*b) conditions of work, stability of activities, transforming the
framework of own work*

It is clear that broader anti-systemic political mobilization has a
difficult and complex task ahead of it. It has to articulate critical
positions, create alliances with trade unions, mobilize other social
forces and understand that without taking power no victory or concession
will have a lasting effect on the policy and the transformation of
social arrangements. Its a puzzle that needs to be pieced together from
different sides and hinges on the careful building of trust, detection
of opportunities and forging of alliances.

Even in situations of successful mobilization of, and alliance with
broader social forces, the bonds tend to remain brittle and can be
difficult to sustain in the long run, as the interests between the
actors are structurally different and focuses of their respective work
tend to grow apart over time. Hence the tensions between trade unions
and civil society organizations that we're all familiar with. The
alliances that will be able to withstand the test of time need not be
built on more than discussion, understanding and joint action, they will
require also the meeting of structural interests.

And there are, indeed, shared focuses and interests between activists
and broader sectors of labor that require addressing and can build more
than just an interventionist dimension of alliance with the trade
unions. Namely, unless better conditions for project-based work can be
created among activists, and unless unions find a way to address the
problem of increasing numbers of flexibilized workforce, it will be a
short ride together. It is not only that the trade unions need help from
this side. In fact, the opposite might be the case. Many of the newly
created organizations won't be able to continue working over a longer
period of time unless they are able to secure the livelihood of their
activists and the resources needed for the organizational work. This
means finding ways within organizations of securing social stability for
the people working, but also advocating and securing fairer remuneration
of labor and structural support in the respective fields. It is highly
alarming that the part of civil society activities that was hit hardest
by the austerity measures are the activities in the field of social care
and labor, where for instance the multiannual support was cut last year
by 60%. If the growing plethora of leftist initiatives and organizations
is to survive in the long run, the effort needs to be undertaken in
advocating policy changes that will bring more support for the work in
the field. This could have long-term effects on the stability of
activities, create better working conditions, prevent the bleeding of
people who will eventually have to leave to do something else to secure
their livelihood.

Some such innovations have been done in culture and media, where there
have been intermittent yet lasting improvements for the actors working
outside of the institutions of the system. But in the field of social
care and labor that advocacy and policy effort needs to be done with
greater persuasiveness and done urgently. With the foreign funders being
so few, the importance of this policy work cannot be understated. And
these innovations have to be made whenever possible through policy
change, so that they cannot be easily undone once the forces in power
change.

As a side note, the operative constraint to sustain the organization,
its resources and livelihood of people can also have limitative effects.
Projects with funder-driven activities have to be pursued,
organizational bureaucratization threatens, meaningful activities have
to be fit into a year-by-year project cycle dictated by funding
opportunities, made standardized to requirements of funding bodies and
ultimately replaceable with any other similar activity.

*c) policy and advocacy*

But looking beyond the securing of conditions for own work, there is a
number of challenges in policy and advocacy work that are waiting to be
taken up. Firstly, as was discussed a moment ago, it is the
transformation of labor legislation and growing flexibilization of work
arrangements that is a labor issue of double relevance for the
reproduction of the left. While precarity has been a constant feature
for those working in activist and media organizations, it has over the
last decade become also the prevailing condition for the greater part of
the workforce. This is a topic where trade unions face limitations:
precarious workers are not easy to unionize, unionization only increases
the insecurity of precarious workers, wage dumping through precarious
workers is hurting unionized workers. Ultimately, unions are losing
their membership to the flexibilization of work arrangements. It is thus
around this topic that alliances can be forged. Activist organizations,
not being bound by the social compact, might command the more
maneuvering space that is not available to trade unions and can
discursively articulate, advocate and mobilize broader forces around
policy change.

Furthermore, it is the protection of public and communal services from
another wave of marketization and privatization that will no doubt
remain a catalyzing activity for the non-institutional left. There's a
direct link between the commodification of public services, whereby
their provision is subsumed under the logic of profit extraction and
whereby the equality of provision is subordinate to the rationalization
of costs of labor and investment, and the reduction of workforce and
their rights. And this link, increasingly becoming clear to the public
through the growing prices of commodified services and the looming cost
of socialization of private risk to taxpayers, can in turn serve as a
basis for broader mobilizations beyond the immediate interests of one's
own constituency.

However, this link still requires explaining to the public in order to
become obvious. And this needs to be done before its too late. But it is
a difficult task given that the commercial media are hawkishly pitting
users of services against the providers of services. Or pitting private
sector workers against public sector workers by exploiting the
asynchronous trajectories of proletarianization. As can be seen from the
recent campaign of the daily Jutarnji list who has joined forces with
private health service providers, spreading fear, uncertainty and danger
over public services is more than just an ideological sleight of hand -
its an actual business model allowing print media to expand into other
businesses.

*d) assailing the media*

Speaking of media, it is the change of media policy that calls for
attention too. While creating independent media outlets in print or on
the internet is important for the articulation of critical discourse,
analysis and creation of shared orientation within the leftist ranks,
obviously a successful counterhegemonic strategy cannot be achieved
without a penetration into the mainstream broadcasting media. Public
broadcasting service is an important element in that strategy, however
it is a volatile institution, dependent on the sway of political forces
and institutional power game. Education of professional journalist is
important too.

However, significant changes are needed in the spectrum allocation and
public media financing policies, giving priority - after years of
privileging commercial media - to non-commercial professional and
community radio and television stations. The parity between commercial
and non-commercial has to be established across all scales and
territories of frequency allocation. Non-commercial allocations in small
communities where commercial media find no interest are important, but
it is only there where the competition for the airwaves is strong and
the audiences are large that a struggle for the heart and mind can be
pursued. It is thus, in Croatian case, the Council for Electronic Media
and the Ministry of Culture that have to be pushed to set the allocation
and financing priorities accordingly.

*e) a variety of strategies*

Obviously all these constraints and challenges in building a sustainable
civil society work on the left that I have emphasized - securing
material resources needed for work and activities, forging alliances
with other actors on the left, advocating policy changes in labor
regulation, public services and media - they all have to go hand in hand
with the work in education, expert bodies, political committees and
governance structures. As recent activist campaigns have demonstrated,
it is only the capacity to engage a variety of parallel strategies -
critical analysis, popular mobilization, juridical contestation,
advocacy, media and last but not least transgression - that allows for
political subjectivation that stands any chance of calling into question
the iron logic of neoliberal doctrine.

But they have also shown that regardless of the scale and impact they
are still not enough to bring about the desired change. Struggles that
have mobilized the largest popular support and energies are being lost
to political actors that are now leading us into another round of
comprehensive marketization and privatization of public sector and
public resources. It stands to reason that without taking political
power, or at least a strategically significant part in it, struggles
will continue to be lost. Without the entry into the electoral political
fray, however, there will be little chance for the left of achieving
lasting changes. By placing all our eggs into the electoral basket - for
reasons of structural deficits of the political system that I have
outlined - even less. We need to explore the opportunities for electoral
engagement, all the while continuing the work on other fronts. In what
organizational form and on what occasion, remains open for careful
consideration.

[^1]: (With the notable exception of the trade unions, which succeeded
    to maintained some of their resources and operative integrity, and
    after the initial confusion and failure to deal with the nationalism
    and lay-offs of Serbian workers, would start the first industrial
    actions in '92-93)
