<!--
.. title: Hacking
.. slug: hacking
-->

---
lead: Text originally commissioned by steirischer herbst and Florian Malzacher for the edited volume *Truth is Concrete - A Handbook for Artistic Strategies in Real Politics* (Sternberg Press, 2014), a collection of 99 short entries written by artists and theorists 'mapping the broad field of engaged art and artistic activism in our times'.
---

<script type="application/json" class="js-hypothesis-config">

{"showHighlights": false}

</script>

<script src="https://hypothes.is/embed.js" async></script>


Hacking is a practice of disruption of communication systems and
information flows, their re-purposing against their intended or legal
use. When discussing technology we tend to perceive it as an enabler.
Tools that help us master the world around us at ever smaller expense of energy. Frequently still, but less so, we think of technology as war
machines, surveillance machines, propaganda machines.

But technology is linked at a more fundamental level to the social
domination. That is, to that most fundamental of forms of contemporary
domination that is the domination of social life by capital. Since the
onset of capitalism, the development of technology was driven
predominantly - but not exclusively - by the laws of intracapitalist
competition: by the pressure to expand demand and increase the
productivity. Particularly technology as a means of production is a form
of domination - that of capital over labor. It is fundamentally the
ingenuity and productivity of collective living labor that has
accumulated over time, assumed the form of the machines and that now
confronts the labor in an alienated form: as the productive coercion
that extracts - 'vampire-like', as Marx called it - the living energy
from it in order to keep accumulating.

Returning now to the contemporary communication technologies and their
attendant configurations of domination, subordination and social control
that are the targets of hacking. A technology is never merely
technological: it is a confluence of engineering, market, law and social
norms. All of these can be mobilized to sustain a form of domination and
a domination by technology. Take the example of the development of
internet. The internet has emerged outside of the domain of capitalist
competition. It was created as an effort by the US military at the
height of Cold War to create a distributed communication system with no
central hub - a system that could sustain the attack and outage of a
part of the network. And it has continued being developed by the
academia, providing the broadest possible participation with the least
degree of centralized control. It's a typical bastard brainchild of the
military-academic complex: robust and open.

In the early 90s the internet has massified, stirring the old hope that
finally we get a two-directional public medium, where everyone will be
able to speak to the broadest public. And twenty years later that
potential has indeed materialized. Almost everybody can participate. But
this democratic participation is relative - it perfectly reflects the
separation between the economic freedoms and political freedoms that the
capitalist domination wants to sustain. While we have the absolute
freedom to debate, we have no means to engage into the transformation of
the economic order. The internet has thus become the epitome of that
paradox of equal inequality: capitalist democracy.

And it has also become a typical capitalist technology. While it feels
like the same old hyperlinked and distributed communication network,
it's now much more centralized, controlled by a handful of service
providers and dominated by commercialized content. Large corporations,
many of whom have erstwhile controlled the old media landscape, now
control large segments of the internet infrastructure. They have
transformed it into a system where monitoring of user behavior has
become the instrument to sell advertisements to the users and sell users
as a commodity to advertisers, while at the same time allowing the easy
aggregation and surveillance of all electronic communication to the
security services. Network topology of internet nowadays is more a hub
than a mash. And legal protections of copyright and patents serve to
sustain the monopoly power of those companies, their capacity to protect
their control over the exchange of information and the development of
technology from the innovations and interventions that might disrupt
their monopoly power.

We have now come the full round to understand what defines the
emancipatory in the practice of hacking. First, it means disrupting the
control of capital over the development of technology, creating the uses
of technology that escape economic interests of technology companies and
transform it into truly people's technology that might allow them, in a
second step, to escape the social control in their effort to transform
the existing social relations. Two hacks are here exemplary: Richard
Stallman's GNU General Public License -- a copyright license that
suspends the private property and commodification in software; and Phil
Zimmermann's Pretty Good Privacy - an encryption algorithm that prevents
anyone to read the communication for whom it is not intended to.

Second, it means using technology to break the economic and legal power
that sustains the domination of capital over social life. Exemplary here
are the hacks performed by the late Aaron Swartz, a hacker and political
activist who has taken his own life in January of 2013, two days after
the US justice decided to take him to court for his JSTOR hack, with the
prospect of up to 35 years in jail. His setting free of metadata from
the Library of Congress, of legal documents from the PACER repository,
and what looks as an attempt to liberate all the scientific articles in
JSTOR repository, were all attempts to circumvent the economic barriers
and controls of access provided by copyright that had little to do with
the authors, but everything to do with the capacity of monopoly capital
to exclude from access to fundamental social goods such as science and
law, and to protect its market power.

The circumstances of Swartz's tragic death indicate, however, that the
copyright oligopolies will not back down under the brave acts of
hacking. We cannot find technological solutions to social problems, nor
engineer our way out of social domination. Without a political struggle
hacks won't stick. And that is a double requirement that Aaron Swartz, a
political activist himself, was aware of in his all too short life of
hacking: without disobedience, antagonism and organizing the struggle
for a transformation of social and political cannot be occasioned -
without a transformation of social and political order all prowess,
fighting spirit and ingenuity is lost.
