<!--
.. title: The Future After the Library: UbuWeb and Monoskop's Radical Gestures
.. slug: future
-->


The institution of the public library has crystallized, developed and
advanced around historical junctures unleashed by epochal economic,
technological and political changes. A series of crises since the advent
of print have contributed to the configuration of the institutional
entanglement of the public library as we know it today:[^1] defined by a
publicly available collection, housed in a public building, indexed and
made accessible with a help of a public catalog, serviced by trained
librarians and supported through public financing. Libraries today
embody the idea of universal access to all knowledge, acting as
custodians of a culture of reading, archivists of material and ephemeral
cultural production, go-betweens of information and knowledge. However, libraries have also embraced a broader spirit of public service and
infrastructure: providing information, education, skills, assistance
and, ultimately, shelter to their communities – particularly their most
vulnerable members.

This institutional entanglement, consisting in a comprehensive
organization of knowledge, universally accessible cultural goods and
social infrastructure, historically emerged with the rise of
(information) science, social regulation characteristic of modernity and
cultural industries. Established in its social aspect as the
institutional exemption from the growing commodification and economic
barriers in the social spheres of culture, education and knowledge, it
is a result of struggles for institutionalized forms of equality that
still reflect the best in solidarity and universality that modernity had
to offer. Yet, this achievement is marked by contradictions that beset
modernity at its core. Libraries and archives can be viewed as an
organon through which modernity has reacted to the crises unleashed by
the growing production and fixation of text, knowledge and information
through a history of transformations that we will discuss below. They
have been an epistemic crucible for the totalizing formalizations that
have propelled both the advances and pathologies of modernity.

Positioned at a slight monastic distance and indolence toward the forms
of pastoral, sovereign or economic domination that defined the
surrounding world that sustained them, libraries could never close the
rift or between the universalist aspirations of knowledge and their
institutional compromise. Hence, they could never avoid being the
battlefield where their own, and modernity's, ambivalent epistemic and
social character was constantly re-examined and ripped asunder. It is
this ambivalent character that has been a potent motor for critical
theory, artistic and political subversion – from Marx's critique of
political economy, psychoanalysis and historic avant-gardes, to
revolutionary politics. Here we will examine the formation of the
library as an epistemic and social institution of modernity and the
forms of critical engagement that continue to challenge the totalizing
order of knowledge and appropriation of culture in the present.

##Here Comes the Flood[^2]

Prior to the advent of print, the collections held in monastic
scriptoria, royal courts and private libraries typically contained a
limited number of canonical manuscripts, scrolls and incunabula. In
Medieval and early Renaissance Europe the canonized knowledge considered
necessary for the administration of heavenly and worldly affairs was
premised on reading and exegesis of biblical and classical texts. It is
estimated that by the 15th century in Western Europe there were no more
than 5 million manuscripts held mainly in the scriptoria of some 21,000
monasteries and a small number of universities. While the number of
volumes had grown sharply from less than 0.8 million in the 12th
century, the number of monasteries had remained constant throughout that
period. The number of manuscripts read averaged around 1,000 per million
inhabitants, with the total population of Europe peaking around 60
million.[^3] All in all, the book collections were small, access was
limited and reading culture played a marginal role.

The proliferation of written matter after the invention of mechanical
movable type printing would greatly increase the number of books, but
also the patterns of literacy and knowledge production. Already in the
first fifty years after Gutenberg's invention, 12 million volumes were
printed, and from this point onwards the output of printing presses grew
exponentially to 700 million volumes in the 18th century. In the
aftermath of the explosion in book production the cost of producing and
buying books fell drastically, reducing the economic barriers to
literacy, but also creating a material vector for a veritable shift of
the epistemic paradigm. The emerging reading public was gaining access
to the new works of a nascent Enlightenment movement, ushering in the
modern age of science. In parallel with those larger epochal
transformations, the explosion of print also created a rising tide of
new books that suddenly inundated the libraries. The libraries now had
to contend both with the orders-of-magnitude greater volume of printed
matter and the growing complexity of systematically storing, ordering,
classifying and tracking all of the volumes in their collection. A once
almost static collection of canonical knowledge became an ever expanding
dynamic flux. This flood of new books, the first of three to follow,
presented principled, infrastructural and organizational challenges to
the library that radically transformed and coalesced its functions.

The epistemic shift created by this explosion of library holdings led to
a revision of the assumption that the library is organized around a
single holy scripture and a small number of classical sources.
Coextensive with the emergence and multiplication of new sciences, the
books that were entering the library now covered an ever diversified
scope of topics and disciplines. And the sheer number of new
acquisitions demanded the physical expansion of libraries, which in turn
required a radical rethinking of the way the books were stored,
displayed and indexed. In fact, the flood caused by the printing press
was nothing short of a revolution in the organization, formalization and
processing of information and knowledge. This becomes evident in the
changes that unfolded between the 16th and the early 20th in the
cataloging of library collections.

The initial listings of books were kept in bound volumes, books in their
own right. But as the number of items arriving into the library grew,
the constant need to insert new entries made the bound book format
increasingly impractical for library catalogs. To make things more
complicated still, the diversification of the printed matter demanded a
richer bibliographic description that would allow better comprehension
of what was contained in the volumes. Alongside the name of the author
and the book's title, the description now needed to include the format
of the volume, the classification of the subject matter and the book's
location in the library. As the pace of new arrivals accelerated, the
effort to create a library catalog became unending, causing a true
crisis in the emerging librarian profession. This would result in a
number of physical and epistemic innovations in the organization and
formalization of information and knowledge. The requirement to
constantly rearrange the order of entries in the listing lead to the
eventual unbinding of the bound catalog into separate slips of paper and
finally to the development of the index card catalog. The unbound index
cards and their floating rearrangement, not unlike that of the movable
type, would in turn result in the design of filing cabinets. From Conrad
Gessner’s "Bibliotheca Universalis", a three-volume book-format catalog
of around 3,000 authors and 10,000 texts, arranged alphabetically and
topically, published in the period 1545-1548; Gottfried Wilhelm
Leibniz's proposals for a universal library during his tenure at the
Wolfenbüttel library in the late 17th century; to Gottfried van
Swieten's catalog of the Viennese court library, the index card catalog
and the filing cabinets would develop almost to their present form.[^4]

The unceasing inflow of new books into the library prompted the need to
spatially organize and classify the arrangement of the collection. The
simple addition of new books to the shelves by size; canonical relevance
or alphabetical order, made little sense in a situation where the corpus
of printed matter was quickly expanding and no individual librarian
could retain an intimate overview of the library's entire collection.
The inflow of books required that the brimming shelf-space be planned
ahead, while the increasing number of expanding disciplines required
that the collection be subdivided into distinct sections by fields.
First the shelves became classified and then the books individually
received a unique identifier. With the completion of the Josephinian
catalog in the Viennese court library, every book became
compartmentalized according to a systematic plan of sciences and
assigned a unique sequence of a Roman numeral, a Roman letter and an
Arabic numeral by which it could be tracked down regardless of its
physical location.[^5] The physical location of the shelves in the
library no longer needed to be reflected in the ordering of the catalog,
and the catalog became a symbolic representation of the freely
re-arrangeable library. In the technological lingo of today, the library
required storage, index, search and address in order to remain
navigable. It is this formalization of a universal system of
classification of objects in the library with the relative location of
objects and re-arrangeable index that would then in 1876 receive its
present standardized form in Melvil Dewey's Decimal System.

The development of the library as an institution of public access and
popular literacy did not proceed apace with the development of its
epistemic aspects. It was only a series of social upheavals and
transformations in the course of the 18th and 19th century that would
bring about another flood of books and political demands, pushing the
library to become embedded in an egalitarian and democratic political
culture. The first big step in that direction came with the decision of
the French revolutionary National Assembly from 2 November 1789 to seize
all book collections from the Church and aristocracy. Million of volumes
were transferred to the[]{#__DdeLink__1_1353027407 .anchor} Bibliothèque
Nationale and local libraries across France. In parallel, particularly
in England, capitalism was on the rise. It massively displaced the
impoverished rural population into growing urban centers, propelled the
development of industrial production and, by the mid-19th century,
introduced the steam-powered rotary press into the book business. As
books became more easily, and mass produced, the commercial subscription
libraries catering to the better-off parts of society blossomed. This
brought the class aspect of the nascent demand for public access to
books to the fore. After the failed attempts to introduce universal
suffrage and end the system of political representation based on
property entitlements in 1830s and 1840s, the English Chartist movement
started to open reading rooms and cooperative lending libraries that
would quickly become a popular hotbed of social exchanges between the
lower classes. In the aftermath of the revolutionary upheavals of 1848,
the fearful ruling classes heeded the demand for tax-financed public
libraries, hoping that the access to literature and edification would
ultimately hegemonize the working class for the benefits of capitalism's
culture of self-interest and competition.[^6]

##The Avant-gardes in the Library

As we have just demonstrated, the public library in its epistemic and
social aspects coalesced in the context of the broader social
transformations of modernity: early capitalism and processes of
nation-building in Europe and the USA. These transformations were
propelled by the advancement of political and economic rationalization,
public and business administration, statistical and archival procedures.
Archives underwent a corresponding and largely concomitant development
with the libraries, responding with a similar apparatus of
classification and ordering to the exponential expansion of
administrative records documenting the social world and to the
historicist impulse to capture the material traces of past events.
Overlaying the spatial organization of documentation; rules of its
classification and symbolic representation of the archive in reference
tools, they tried to provide a formalization adequate to the passion for
capturing historical or present events. Characteristic of the ascendant
positivism of the 19th century, the archivists’ and librarians’
epistemologies harbored a totalizing tendency that would become subject
to subversion and displacement in the first decades of the 20th century.

The assumption that the classificatory form can fully capture the
archival content would become destabilized over and over by the early
avant-gardist permutations of formal languages of classification:
dadaist montage of the contingent compositional elements, surrealist
insistence on the unconscious surpluses produced by automatized
formalized language, constructivist foregrounding of dynamic and
spatialized elements in the acts of perception and cognition of an
artwork.[^7] The material composition of the classified and ordered
objects already contained formalizations deposited into those objects by
the social context of their provenance or projected onto them by the
social situation of encounter with them. Form could become content and
content could become form. The appropriations, remediations and
displacements exacted by the neo-avant-gardes in the second half of the
20th century produced subversions, resignifications and simulacra that
only further blurred the lines between histories and their construction,
dominant classifications and their immanent instabilities.

Where does the library fit into this trajectory? Operating around an
uncertain and politically embattled universal principle of public access
to knowledge and organization of information, libraries continued being
sites of epistemic and social antagonisms, adaptations and resilience in
response to the challenges created by the waves of radical expansion of
textuality and conflicting social interests between the popular reading
culture and the commodification of cultural consumption. This precarious
position is presently being made evident by the third big flood – after
those unleashed by movable type printing and the social context of
industrial book production – that is unfolding with the transition of
the book into the digital realm. Both the historic mode of the
institutional regulation of access and the historic form of epistemic
classification are swept up in this transformation. While the internet
has made possible a radically expanded access to digitized culture and
knowledge, the vested interests of cultural industries reliant on
copyright for their control over cultural production have deepened the
separation between cultural producers and their readers, listeners and
viewers. While the hypertextual capacity for cross-reference has blurred
the boundaries of the book, digital rights management technologies have
transformed e-books into closed silos. Both the decommodification of
access and the overcoming of the reified construct of the self-enclosed
work in the form of a book come at the cost of illegality.

Even the avant-gardes in all their inappropriable and idiosyncratic
recalcitrance fall no less under the legally delimited space of
copyrightable works. As they shift format, new claims of ownership and
appropriation are built. Copyright is a normative classification that is
totalizing, regardless of the effects of leaky networks speaking to the
contrary. Few efforts have insisted on the subverting of juridical
classification by copyright more lastingly than the UbuWeb archive.
Espousing the avant-gardes' ethos of appropriation, for almost 20 years
it has collected and made accessible the archives of the unknown;
outsider, rare and canonized avant-gardes and contemporary art that
would otherwise remained reserved for the vaults and restricted access
channels of esoteric markets, selective museological presentations and
institutional archives. Knowing that asking to publish would amount to
aligning itself with the totalizing logic of copyright, UbuWeb has
shunned the permission culture. At the level of poetical operation, as a
gesture of displacing the cultural archive from a regime of limited,
into a regime of unlimited access, it has created provocations and
challenges directed at the classifying and ordering arrangements of
property over cultural production. One can only assume that as such it
has become a mechanism for small acts of treason for the artists, who,
short of turning their back fully on the institutional arrangements of
the art world they inhabit, use UbuWeb to release their own works into
unlimited circulation on the net. Sometimes there might be no way or
need to produce a work outside the restrictions imposed by those
institutions, just as sometimes it is for academics impossible to avoid
the contradictory world of academic publishing, yet that is still no
reason to keep one's allegiance to their arrangements.

At the same time UbuWeb has played the game of avant-gardist subversion:
"If it doesn't exist on the internet, it doesn't exist". Provocation is
most effective when it is ignorant of the complexities of the contexts
that it is directed at. Its effect starts where fissures in the defense
of the opposition start to show. By treating UbuWeb as massive evidence
for the internet as a process of reappropriation, a process of "giving
to all", its volunteering *spiritus movens,* Kenneth Goldsmith, has been
constantly rubbing copyright apologists up the wrong way. Rather than
producing qualifications, evasions and ambivalences, straightforward
affirmation of copying, plagiarism and reproduction as a dominant yet
suppressed mode of operation of digital culture re-enacts the
avant-gardes' gesture of taking no hostages from the officially
sanctioned systems of classification. By letting the incumbents of
control over cultural production react to the norm of copying, you let
them struggle to dispute the norm rather than you having to try to
defend the norm.

UbuWeb was an early-comer, starting in 1996 and still functioning today
on seemingly similar technology, it's a child of the early days of World
Wide Web and the promissory period of the experimental internet. It's
resolutely Web 1.0, with a single maintainer, idiosyncratically simple
in its layout and programmatically committed to the eventual
obsolescence and sudden abandonment. No platform, no generic design, no
widgets, no kludges and no community features. Only Beckett avec links.
Endgame.

##A Book is an Index is an Index is an Index...

Since the first book flood, the librarian dream of epistemological
formalization has revolved around the aspiration to cross-reference all
the objects in the collection. Within the physical library the topical
designation has been relegated to the confines of index card catalog
that remained isolated from the structure of citations and indexes in
the books themselves. With the digital transition of the book, the
time-shifted hypertextuality of citations and indexes became realizable
as the immediate cross-referentiality of the segments of individual text
to segments of other texts and other digital artifacts across now
permeable boundaries of the book.

Developed as a wiki for collaborative studies of art, media and the
humanities, Monoskop.org took up the task of mapping and describing
avant-gardes and media art in Europe. In its approach both indexical and
encyclopedic, it is an extension of the collaborative editing made
possible by wiki technology. Wikis rose to prominence in the early 2000s
allowing everyone to edit and extend websites running on that technology
by mastering a very simple markup language. Wikis have been the
harbinger of a democratization of web publishing that would eventually
produce the largest collaborative website on the internet – the
Wikipedia, as well as a number of other collaborative platforms.
Monoskop.org embraces the encyclopedic spirit of Wikipedia, focusing on
its own specific topical and topological interests. However, from its
earliest days Monoskop.org has also developed as a form of index that
maps out places, people, artworks, movements, events and venues that
compose the dense network of European avant-gardes and media art.

If we take the index as a formalization of cross-referential relations
between names of people, titles of works and concepts that exist in the
books and across the books, what emerges is a model of a relational
database reflecting the rich mesh of cultural networks. Each book can
serve as an index linking its text to people, other books, segments in
them. To provide a paradigmatic demonstration of that idea, Monoskop.org
has assembled an index of all persons in Friedrich Kittler's "Discourse
Networks", with each index entry linking both to its location in the
digital version of the book displayed on the Aaaaarg.org archive and to
relevant resources for those persons on the Monoskop.org and the
internet. Hence, each object in the library, an index in its own right,
potentially allows one to initiate the relational re-classification and
re-organization of all other works in the library through linkable
information.

Fundamental to the works of the post-socialist retro-avant-gardes of the
last couple of decades has been the re-writing of a history of art in
reverse. In the works of IRWIN, Laibach or Mladen Stilinović, or
comparable work of Komar and Melamid, totalizing modernity is detourned
by re-appropriating the forms of visual representation and
classification that the institutions of modernity used to construct a
linear historical narrative of evolutions and breaks in the 19th and
20th century. Genealogical tables, events, artifacts and discourses of
the past were re-enacted, over-affirmed and displaced to open up the
historic past relegated to the archives to an understanding that
transformed the present into something radically uncertain. The efforts
of Monoskop.org in digitizing of the artifacts of the 20th century
avant-gardes and playing with the epistemic tools of early book culture
is a parallel gesture, with a technological twist. If big data and the
control over information flows of today increasingly naturalizes and
re-affirms the 19th century positivist assumptions of the steerablity of
society, then the endlessly recombinant relations and affiliations
between cultural objects threaten to overflow that recurrent epistemic
framework of modernity's barbarism in its cybernetic form.

The institution of the public library finds itself today under a double
attack. One unleashed by the dismantling of the institutionalized forms
of social redistribution and solidarity. The other by the commodifying
forces of expanding copyright protections and digital rights management,
control over the data flows and command over the classification and
order of information. In a world of collapsing planetary boundaries and
unequal development, those who control the epistemic order control the
future.[^8] The Googles and the NSAs run on capturing totality – the
world's knowledge and communication made decipherable, organizable and
controllable. The instabilities of the epistemic order that the library
continues to instigate at its margins contributes to keeping the future
open beyond the script of 'commodify and control'. In their acts of
re-appropriation UbuWeb and Monoskop.org are but a reminder of the
resilience of libraries’ instability that signals toward a future that
can be made radically open.

[^1]: For the concept and the full scope of the contemporary library as
    institutional entanglement see Shannon Mattern, “Library as
    Infrastructure,” *Places Journal*, accessed April 9, 2015,
    https://placesjournal.org/article/library-as-infrastructure/.

[^2]: The metaphor of the information flood, here incanted in the words
    of Peter Gabriel’s song with apocalyptic overtones, as well as a
    good part of the historic background of the development of index
    card catalog in the following paragraphs are based on Markus
    Krajewski, *Paper Machines: About Cards & Catalogs, 1548-1929* (MIT
    Press, 2011). The organizing idea of Krajewski's historical account,
    that the index card catalog can be understood as a Turing machine
    avant la lettre, served as a starting point for the understanding of
    the library as an epistemic institution developed here.

[^3]: For an economic history of the book in the Western Europe see
    Eltjo Buringh and Jan Luiten Van Zanden, “Charting the ‘Rise of the
    West’: Manuscripts and Printed Books in Europe, A Long-Term
    Perspective from the Sixth through Eighteenth Centuries,” *The
    Journal of Economic History* 69, No. 02 (June 2009): 409–45,
    doi:10.1017/S0022050709000837, particularly Tables 1-5.

[^4]: Krajewski, *Paper Machines*, op. cit., chapter 2.

[^5]: Ibid., 30.

[^6]: For the social history of public library see Matthew Battles,
    *Library: An Unquiet History* (Random House, 2014) chapter 5: “Books
    for all”.

[^7]: Sven Spieker, *The Big Archive: Art from Bureaucracy* (MIT Press,
    2008) provides a detailed account of strategies that the historic
    avant-gardes and the post-war art have developed toward the
    classificatory and ordering regime of the archive.

[^8]: In his article “Controlling the Future - Edward Snowden and the
    New Era on Earth,” Eurozine, (accessed April 13, 2015,
    http://www.eurozine.com/articles/2014-12-19-altvater-en.html), Elmar
    Altvater makes a comparable argument that the efforts of the “Five
    Eyes” to monitor the global communication flows, revealed by Edward
    Snowden, and the control of the future social development defined by
    the urgency of mitigating the effects of the planetary ecological
    crisis cannot be thought apart.
