<!--
.. title: Technologies for an Ecological Transition: A Faustian Bargain?
.. slug: ecotech
-->

<script type="application/json" class="js-hypothesis-config">

{"showHighlights": false}

</script>

<script src="https://hypothes.is/embed.js" async></script>

> “Neither tales of progress nor of ruin tell us how to think about
> collaborative survival.” — Anna Tsing[^1]

Since around 1970 the world has been living beyond Earth’s ecological
limits. Humanity currently operates at over 1.6 times Earth's
regenerative biocapacity. In 2016 the Earth Overshoot Day — the day in a
year when humanity’s demand for environmental resources for that year
exceeds Earth’s capacity to regenerate those resources in that year —
arrived on August 8, five days earlier than in 2015.[^2] However, not
everybody has been living equally beyond our common means. If everybody
lived the standard of an average US or Gulf citizen, we would need 4-6
planets to sustain the human population.[^3] As the effects of
human-induced change to Earth’s biophysical systems catalyze extreme
weather patterns, floods, droughts, wildfires, accelerated species
extinction, lower crop yields, and famines, the global poor are asked to
soak up the cost of the change generated by the global rich. Without
means to adapt and to mitigate the effects of climate change, regions of
the world that were previously ravaged by imperial conquest,
postcolonial instability, and now mounting environmental pressures are
likely to see as many as 200 million “climate refugees” by 2050.[^4]
Yet, the costs of climate change are shared just as unequally within
nations as across them. With structural adjustments and neoliberal
restructuring, inequality and vulnerability are on also on the rise.
Proletarianization has affected large segments of the population in the
developed Global North and the urban poor and the vulnerable
country-side are now feeling the effects of climate change as food and
energy prices reverberate against a rising tide of climate
disasters.[^5] Nowhere is that double impact more readily observable
than in Europe, where the rising conservative forces have pitted the
surplus workforce left in the wake of post-socialist global re-ordering
against the migrants escaping the plight of war and environmental
degradation.

The historical trajectory of anthropogenic environmental transformation
is well-established: the beginning of the industrial revolution and the
discovery of fossil fuels allowed humans to tap into energy stocks much
richer than anything hitherto available. By the 1800s industrial
capitalism was rapidly transforming vast expanses of the world leading
quickly to initial increases in atmospheric CO~2~ concentration levels,
land transformation and transformation of metabolic cycles, only to
enter a period of Great Acceleration after World War II resulting in the
present day CO~2~ levels, depletion of soil and biodiversity loss.[^6]

Against this background of anthropogenic environmental change, in this
text I intend to discuss the role of technologies in two contrasting
ecological transition scenarios. First, I will analyze the limits that
beset the strategies of green innovation and green growth, which provide
a foundation for much of international climate change policy — and which
I understand to fall into the long lineage of dominant
techno-developmentalist doxa. In line with that doxa, these strategies
place inordinate expectations on the process of innovation to help us
out of the present planetary predicament. Second, I will indicate what
are the takeaways for a degrowth scenario from that analysis, cautioning
against an all-too-facile cherry-picking of technologies and exclusive
focus on small-scale convivial technologies. I finish by proposing some
elements of strategy that might after all be reasonable to adopt in a
degrowth transition, where that transition is understood as a
potentially turbulent and revolutionary process of transition to a mode
of production, social organization and metabolic relation between
humanity and environment that would no longer be premised on economic
growth that both sustains the dynamic of capital's self-expansion and
drives the ever greater extraction of Earth's natural resources.

## Technologies and Environmental Crisis

Changes in the planetary and social environment have been in no small
way enabled by the growing productivity of technologies. In the
progressivist world-view that continues to dominate in the present,
technoscience is regarded as the single most important factor in human
development. Advances in health, lifespan, nutrition, housing, mobility,
communication, education, and general material abundance are all
cursorily attributed to scientific and technological development to the
disregard of other transformative factors such as political struggles,
social institutions, language, or play.

As Lewis Mumford contended half a century ago, the prevalent world-view
of progress has an in-built bias that understands human evolution as the
evolution of a uniquely tool-making and tool-wielding species.[^7] On
this view, informed by a mass of mechanical, fossil-fuel based
inventions made in the nineteenth century, the human is understood
primarily as *homo faber*. However, by disregarding the fact that there
are other animals that make and wield tools, this overlooks a truly
unique human capacity of combining and amplifying tools with social and
symbolic structures — foremost spoken language. And yet, that bias,
which for the purposes of my analysis I call techno-developmentalism,
has remained unperturbed by the fact that gains in productivity enabled
by technology have presided over an unprecedented environmental crisis
on planetary scale and, after a period of post-WWII contribution to
prosperity built on the militancy of the labor, is now the driving
factor of growing economic inequality.[^8]

Technology is thus part of the problem. Yet, the techno-developmentalist
common-sense, now returning greenwashed in the guise of green innovation
and green growth sales pitches, would have us believe that technology is
the only solution to the problem. Scenarios of decarbonization of the
global economy, and the climate change policy decisions within the
framework of the Paris Agreement that are based on them, hedge our
future on an unprecedented acceleration in technological development. By
leaving the structural interdependence of technological systems and
carbon-based capitalist socio-metabolism unexamined, techno-fixes
effectively gag discussion of systemic change as politically inoperable.
This political trap is further compounded by another contemporary doxa —
one that considers that technological development in the present is best
left to the private enterprise. Climate change thus can only be tackled
if markets can be persuaded to provide a technological solution — or it
will not be tackled at all.

##The Limits of Techno-Developmentalism

It is within these constraints of the ecological transition debate that
the narratives of green innovation, green growth and green capitalism
hold a particular appeal. They all start from the assumption that
technological innovation, by creating green technologies that are
carbon-neutral, more efficient, resource saving, recyclable, will lead
the global economy out of the environmental predicament, occasion
sustainable development, and thus make possible long-term green-growth.

Yet, if, unlike our political decision makers, we are willing to
consider the interdependence of the contemporary technological apparatus
with the operation of contemporary capitalism — the fact that
technologies help capitalism reproduce at a world scale and that
capitalist accumulation in turn directs the development of technologies,
this green vision of techno-developmentalism gradually assumes a somber
hue. The interdependence implies that promises of green innovation run
up against a number of structural limits and limitations that shape the
present-day capitalist world-system. In the following paragraphs, I’ll
first outline four sets of limits, as they also impose constraints on
the broader ecological transition debate, before returning to the
concrete technologies under discussion and their palliative role in the
policy debate.

### Capitalism’s Conjunctural Crisis

First, capitalism in the present faces a conjunctural crisis that is not
likely to be resolved by means of a green techno-developmentalist fix.
Technologies in the present are not productive enough to help capitalism
maintain constant levels of compound growth at the expanded scale of
world economy. If we are to follow the analyses of the historians such
as Robert Brenner, Wolfgang Streeck or Gopal Balakrishnan, since the
1970s global economic system has been experiencing a drawn-out
downturn.[^9] Technological advances in fossil fuel extraction,
computerization, and containerization have allowed capitalism to
relocate production overseas, bring down the price of labor, and
increase the productivity of capital. However, they have failed to
catalyze the levels of growth and profit that were enabled by the
general-purpose technologies of the immediate post-war period —
primarily for reasons that the total volume of the economy has grown
immensely. To maintain a healthy annual growth rate of 3 percent over a
period of forty years means that the total volume of economic activity
needs to increase by a 300 percent — three times the total value, three
times the amount of goods and services, and roughly three times the
energy and material throughput compared to forty years earlier.[^10]
There’s little evidence that the green technologies, premised on
reduction or stabilization of energy and material throughput, can do
better to maintain that level of growth.

At the same time as new technologies of the 1960s and 1970s were failing
to reproduce the growth levels of the post-WWII *trente glorieuses*, the
effects of the relocation of production from the advanced capitalist
economies to Asia were of limited success to capital. In spite of high
rates of growth achieved in Asia over the last decades, low-wage
economies are not rich enough to create levels of demand achieved in the
West a couple of decades earlier. For several decades Western
consumption was made possible by the expansion of private credit and
financialization. Yet, with the onset of Great Recession of 2008,
providing credit finance to consumption — or production for that matter
— no longer seems a feasible option for capital. At this moment, it
prefers to keep US\$13.4tn parked in the negative yielding bonds.[^11]
Instead of investing to achieve returns or sustain growth, at the moment
it is less unprofitable to pay the interest to trustworthy borrowers who
will keep the money safe.

All this signals that the capitalist world-system might have entered a
steady-state of stagnation. Capitalist expansion has reached its limits.
Capitalism is shifting away from the growth-premised model and this is
bound to lead to social turbulence and shakeup of the political order.
Under conditions of no growth the system of economic competition turns
into a zero-sum game where gains in income and wealth entail direct
impoverishment of some and accumulation of economic power for others.
Extreme levels of inequality thus created can be maintained only by a
growing economic despotism, social policing and political
authoritarianism whose outlines we can see forming all too clearly on
the horizon. If nothing, this might prove conducive for public advocacy
of an alternative, degrowth transition, one that might prevent the
social transformation ahead of us from spiraling, as Serge Latouche has
cautioned, into barbarism.[^12]

### Uneven Development

Second, sustainable development premised on technological change might
not be achievable due to limits imposed by uneven development. With
asymmetries of wage and purchasing power between national economies
diverging by orders of magnitude, global free trade facilitates an
exchange between highly unequal economic areas. This allows more
advanced economies to siphon off the products of labor and natural
resources of less advanced economies at knockdown prices. What is
seemingly a symmetric relation of trade, an exchange of goods for money,
a magic of conversion of unequal physical units of labor and energy into
equivalent symbolic units provides economies with a higher purchasing
power with an easy way to extract resources from and externalize
environmental costs onto those with a smaller purchasing power.[^13]

As Arghiri Emmanuel, the originator of unequal exchange theory, has
contended, the underdeveloped economies are caught in a spiral. In the
international economic exchange they are forced to sell products of
labor and natural resources cheaply and buy commodity and capital goods
dearly, and are thus locked in underdevelopment while trying to
catch-up.[^14] The reason being that in developmental terms there are no
technologies appropriate to their level of economic development other
than the most productive and hence most expensive, which such economies
cannot afford. In this way, they remain destined to use obsolete, less
efficient, and environmentally damaging technologies.

Uneven development is thus reinforced by varying levels of technological
productivity. Labor and resources are extracted with inferior and
inefficient technologies. If more developed economies would internalize
the cost of uneven development by bringing wages and technologies of the
underdeveloped economies to the same standard as theirs, the economic
expansion altogether would likely grind to a halt. The consequence is
that the developmentalist dynamic, which pushes all societies to try
catching-up to the advanced capitalist nations, is purchased only at a
price of unevenness, inefficient technologies and environmental
injustice. Contrary to what green growth boosterism, pointing to a shiny
example of Germany, would like us to believe, green capitalism in one
country simply cannot work as it depends upon unevenness elsewhere. If
green technologies should serve as a new frontier of economic expansion,
they surely will not be equally available across varying levels of
development.

### Environmental Time-Bomb

Third, there are extensive debates regarding the environmental limits to
techno-developmentalism. Capitalism’s downturn can also be attributed in
part to the fact that the four “cheap natures” — food, energy, raw
materials and human labor — are increasingly becoming more expensive to
extract and secure. As Jason W. Moore has argued, capitalism has been
able to appropriate by extra-economic means — conquest, slavery,
plunder, uneven development — large contributions to its value
production that it has been able to keep off its accounts.[^15]
Colonialism, imperialism and neo-colonialism have thus provided an
extra-economic fix to some of the inner contradictions and crises of
maturing capitalism. In the process, they have transformed
pre-capitalist regions around the world into an integrated capitalist
world-system and planetary world-ecology that is now going through a
fundamental phase-shift. Exponentially expanding food production, fossil
fuel exploration, and raw material extraction from rich soils, stocks,
and reserves have allowed capitalism to keep the cost of material inputs
and labor power low in spite of its ever-growing throughput. However, as
the environmental stresses on human habitats are rising, stocks of
conventional oil are past their peak and reserves of many important
minerals are reaching their limits, these resources are becoming more
expensive to extract and secure, creating downward pressure on
capitalism's growth. While capitalism has always depended on
technological advances and accumulation by dispossession to secure these
low-cost inputs, their reduced global availability in the face of still
growing demand in the present calls for even more advanced technologies
of extraction and mercantile neocolonialism that might environmentally
and politically no longer be feasible.

Furthermore, viewed from the framework of bioeconomics, initially
developed by Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen, all economic processes can be
understood as entropic. The economic production transforms low entropy
inputs of human labor, fuel and raw materials into high entropy outputs
of commodity, heat and emissions — and as the inputs have a lower price
than the products, the generation of economic value is premised on the
dissipation of resources of energy and matter.[^16] Given Earth's
limited capacity of regeneration, this sets rigid biophysical limits on
growth. There’s a heated debate around the validity of
Goergescu-Roegen’s assumptions of a strong physical causation between
growth and emissions. Improving carbon efficiency against GDP growth in
advanced economies seems to suggest that decoupling growth from CO~2~
emissions could be achievable through extended use of renewables and
improvements in energy efficiency. But that evidence is only of limited
value considering that the total emissions are not abating in the
context of globally integrated production flows, which combine both
efficient and inefficient technologies and entangle the national energy
consumption of advanced economies with the energy diet of the rest of
the world. Even if the global economy were to reduce CO~2~ emissions,
with the continued growth that produces also non-recyclable waste the
entropy would persist. Regardless of the principled argument whether
decoupling is in sum total possible or not, the efforts to reduce carbon
emissions and the efforts to reduce the extraction of raw materials and
depletion of soils are too slow for the time-bomb that is ticking away.
The decarbonization and dematerialization is an extremely daunting task
for the short time-window available to us before we enter the period of
non-linear environmental change.

### Socio-Technological Contingencies

Last, there are specifically socio-technological limits to
techno-developmentalism*.* Technological innovation is a complex
process, requiring the synergy of technologists, regulators, financiers,
businesses and institutions. On the technological side, technological
systems depend for their operation on integration with other
technological systems. In fact, if we follow the influential historian
of technology Thomas P. Hughes, much of the technological innovation
principally reacts to critical problems of existing technological
systems and optimization of their operation.[^17] In other words,
innovation is path dependent and alternatives cannot be easily willed
into existence. On the social side, technological innovation is driven
by critical problems of capital, military, administration, and
population politics – and supported by institutions, financiers, and
governments to that end.

While this does support the hopes that the development of technologies
can be steered toward reduction of energy and material throughput, this
also means that desirable technological systems cannot be easily
decoupled from other technological systems on which they depend for
operation. Thus it is unlikely that innovation will unfold smoothly if
it is disruptive to the operation of current energetically and
materially intensive systems and social interests entrenched into those
technologies. We are thus back to the political trap of trying to
institute a shift in the existing social metabolism while maintaining
the capitalist economy.

## A Curious Case of Negative Emission Technologies

I have outlined four limits to green techno-developmentalism:
conjunctural, developmental, environmental, and socio-technological.
They strongly indicate, contrary to what the green growth narrative
would like us to believe, that a green revolution through technological
innovation cannot resolve the crisis of growth or the crisis of
environment that the present-day capitalist system faces. In fact, if we
examine more closely what climate change policy prefers technologically,
we are confronted with clear evidence that decision makers are entering
a moral hazard. They are placing their bets on the wondrous development
of barely existing technologies in order to defer the politically costly
measures of rapid decarbonization.

As Kevin Anderson and Glen Peters have forcefully argued in a recent
*Science* opinion piece, the scenarios that inform policy decisions and
form the basis for Paris Agreement voluntary pledges hide their
continued commitment to high carbon emissions behind a large-scale
deployment of negative emission technologies.[^18] Negative emission
technologies are mitigation technologies that make it possible to
capture CO~2~ created in the process of power generation or already
existing in the atmosphere, and store it long-term in deep geological
layers, oceans or mineral formations. The most common model of carbon
capture and sequestration (CCS) used in transition scenarios is in
combination with the power generation from biomass, which would produce
clean renewable energy by burning the crops cultivated specifically for
this purpose. If used in combination with fossil fuels such as coal, the
CCS would enable a reduction of carbon emissions by up to 90 percent.
And if used for the sequestration of atmospheric CO~2~, it would
wondrously expand our total carbon emission budget and allow us to
continue with the business as usual.

All this looks highly promising. And yet, power generation with biomass
is still in its early testing phase with only two power plants in
operation. In addition, using large quantities of biomass required for
the energy transformation on a global scale would require enormous
masses of arable land — two times the area of India — with a number of
adverse effects on land use, food security, and biodiversity.

On the other hand, pilot projects of power generation with CCS in
combination with fossil fuels instead have so far proven economically
unfeasible.[^19] Moreover, the capture of atmospheric of CO~2~ has not
progressed further than a pilot phase and also entails strong, adverse
effects on the environment.[^20] So, even if proven deployable at a
globally relevant scale, negative emission technologies are likely
decades away from full development and deployment. Yet, they form a
cornerstone of decarbonization scenarios — according to IPCC by 2100
they might contribute as much as 55 percent of emission-cutting effort.
This highly speculative techno-developmental fix helps decision makers
to avoid radical, rapid and costly mitigation measures which would have
to happen now: increase of energy efficiency, reduction in fossil fuel
use and large-scale deployment of renewables. With the combined
voluntary pledges made by the world’s governments, we remain currently
on track to a global temperature increase by at least 2.7ºC, if not
more.[^21] So, should we continue to bet on negative emission
technologies and these fail to live up to expectations, we might find
ourselves in a much more dire situation than if immediate yet costly
measures are undertaken now.

The blind techno-optimist belief of transition scenarios does not stop
there. A number of models of deep decarbonization used in IPCC
assessments have been recently reviewed by Peter J. Loftus, Armond M.
Cohen, Jane C. S. Long and Jesse D. Jenkins.[^22] It turns out that
these scenarios almost universally make the assumption of efficiency
gains and large-scale deployment of various forms of power generation
that surpass anything we have seen over the previous four decades of
technological development. Rates of annual change in energy efficiency
assumed by the least ambitious group of models set average reductions
for the next four decades (-1.5 to -1.8 percent/year) on par with the
record yearly values and double the average for the last four decades
(-0.8 percent/year), whereas the most ambitious set average efficiency
gains four times that (-3.4 to 3.7 percent/year). Also levels of new
installed capacity of — depending on the model — wind, ocean, solar,
geothermal, CCS, biomass, nuclear and hydroelectric power generation,
assumed as main components of substitution of fossil fuels, usually
surpass by far what we have seen in the past.

All this leads to the conclusion that narratives of green growth, green
innovation, and green capitalism ultimately depend on a number of
techno-developmentalist assumptions that verge on political denial and
bad faith. As I argued earlier, a number of conjunctural, environmental,
developmental, and socio-technological limits indicate that humanity is
living beyond the Earth’s ecological limits. We cannot simply hope to
geo-engineer our way out of the predicament. What is needed is not only
a radical change in the petro-capitalist technological apparatus, but
also a parallel transformation of the relations of production and social
reproduction. Yes, we need to rapidly instill into our current
technological base greater energy efficiency; we need to massively build
out renewables; and we need to find new ways to reduce CO~2~ emissions,
but we also need a transition from capitalist economies to an
organization of social life that is premised on lower and different
throughput, able therefore to stay in line with the regenerative
biocapacities of our environment. And this is where degrowth comes into
picture — as both a critical re-assessment and a practical redress of
the techno-developmentalist vision.

### Degrowth and Transitional Technologies

Degrowth as theory advocates a systemic change. But as practice, it is
leading by example, proposing and devising a number of pre-figurative
and trans-formative concrete utopias that start from the present social
metabolism. The more frugal, localized, and mutualist socio-economic
system that degrowth envisions calls for a re-structuring of existing
relations of production, modes of distribution, value accounting
systems, and, relevant to us here, technologies.
[]{#__DdeLink__1135_1932350778 .anchor}Autonomous, distributed,
localized, energy saving, resource efficient, non-obsolescent,
recyclable are just some of the qualities that degrowth seeks in
technologies it deems either appropriate or appropriable.[^23] Citizen
energy co-ops, organic food production, passive house construction,
micro-production, resource-sharing digital platforms, free software,
distributed computer systems, open patent pools, and crypto-currencies
are all part of that strategic vision.

While acknowledging the emancipatory import of the technologies that the
degrowth narrative embraces, my earlier analysis of limits to
techno-developmentalism calls for caution also when considering what
technologies can be conducive to degrowth. Caution is warranted against
laying hopes in this or any specific inventory of technologies and
caution is warranted against lionizing the specifically convivial,
small-scale or distributed character of these technologies. Technologies
are imbricated with their socio-economic context. Our technological
systems have largely co-evolved with the capitalist world-system. The
integration and functioning of that world-system are only made possible
by the existing technological apparatus. Globe-spanning and interlocking
complex of computerization, containerization and fossil fuel extraction
is essential for its continued reproduction. In return, technological
systems are built for the scale of material and energy flows and
intensity of capital investments that the capitalist world-system
requires.

This has four significant implications. First, we cannot decouple
technologies from the capitalist system of production, its scale of
throughput and its capital intensity, and assume that they will continue
to function as they do now. Take the example of personal computer — a
highly useful, distributed, and autonomous technology. Its present
functionality is dependent on a large-scale system of manufacture and
centralized communication networks. Almost 25 percent of all email
traffic is operated through Google’s datacenters. Substituting these
networks with the existing solutions for collectively-run distributed
infrastructures and platforms would likely entail a scale-down effect,
with potential fragmentation to much lower scales and substantial loss
of social utility.

Second, the economic contraction would entail a de-intensification of
flows and investments into existing large technological systems and
infrastructure, forcing the transitional process to search for different
ways of dealing with the problem of maintenance. In a scenario where
elements of the present mode of production are gradually replaced by
various re-purposed and re-localized alternatives, this continues to
pose a problem since not all infrastructures can be localized and
maintained in a collectivized way. In addition, and particularly after
decades of globalization and specialization of production, many parts of
the world will still need to trade long distance to procure some
essential goods they cannot source locally.

Third, the transitional process will be under pressure to innovate
substitutions for technologies that will go defunct or become too
expensive due to growing cost of material inputs that go into them.
However, critical problems of technological systems do not always get
solved and that means that sometimes technological systems need to be
phased out with a certain loss of social utility.

Fourth, the transitional process being transitional means that it will
have to start in parallel with the conditions of the existing mode of
production. Not even revolutions can transform a mode of production
overnight — thus new patterns of production can be developed and
experimented with only under the compromised conditions of two competing
modes of production.[^24] This circumstance sets the operative horizon
wherein technologies conducive to degrowth can be developed in the
present — situated between two modes and dependent on the present
technological base to create a future technological base.

These implications, however, do not entail that technologies that are
autonomous, distributed, localized, energy saving, resource efficient,
non-obsolescent, and recyclable do not matter for a transition into a
degrowth society, but rather that their development and deployment have
to go hand in hand with broader social, economical and political
upheaval and change, in the context of which such technologies could
secure food, housing, energy, tools, and other basics needed for the
virtuous reproduction of a transition to a more sustainable and
equitable economy. We are moving into the zone where we cannot know what
will actually work and what will fail. But the bottom line is that in an
unlikely case a society decides to pursue a path of degrowth, the
interdependence of technological systems and inability to secure
operation of basic infrastructure might push it back onto a
growth-oriented path.

### Outline of a Degrowth-Oriented Technological Strategy

Technologies alone thus cannot drive the post-capitalist transition.
Nonetheless, technologies will necessarily be a part of any transitional
process and practice. We live in a technological world, and we will
obviously continue to live in a technological world. Although I have
insisted that we should not put all our eggs in the technology basket,
it is reasonable to think strategically about how to re-purpose and
develop technologies that *might* prove useful and maintainable in and
after the transition. So, what would a strategy of technological
development conducive to a degrowth transition be?

Building on the work of Vasilis Kostakis and Michel Bauwens, who have
developed a model of a networked collaborative economy that is situated
between the existing capitalist commodity production and transitional
co-operativist production, I propose a more general model extending
beyond the information economy — a wishlist of sorts.[^25] Its normative
outline would include the following aspects:

(1) Process of technological development: Methodologically, the
    > development should prioritize innovations that can be developed
    > globally, but applied locally. Internationally coordinated
    > research efforts should result in localized, smaller-scale
    > production technologies that can be easily adapted and installed
    > under varying economic and environmental circumstances around the
    > world. Innovations should go into an open pool of patents governed
    > by licenses that are free for any non-commercial application,
    > while non-free for corporate use. Patent fees from commercial
    > applications should help subsidize further research and
    > development.

(2) Focus of technological development: The earlier discussion leads to
    > a conclusion that there are two general types of technology that
    > need to be prioritized. One is focused on the decarbonization of
    > power generation, industry and transportation, while the other on
    > the re-structuring of our current production and consumption
    > patterns. Increased energy efficiency and replacement of current
    > power generation capacity should take precedence over a build-out
    > of new capacities because the reduction of energy available for
    > use will create more rapid decarbonization and prevent the rebound
    > effect. What concerns the production and consumption patterns,
    > recycling, repair, maintenance, and social reproduction should
    > take precedence over the expansion of commodity production and
    > internationalized trade.

(3) Governance of technological development: The agent of the
    > development process should, on one side, be public research and
    > industrial policy bodies, focusing in particular on the urgent
    > goals of rapid and deep decarbonization. They should sensitize the
    > public for this goal and they should be pressured by the public
    > towards this goal. National and local governments, their
    > infrastructural and communal services, should support – through
    > procurement and technological infrastructure — a massive uptake of
    > localizable and smaller-scale cooperative production methods — of
    > renewable energy, organically grown food, sustainable housing,
    > etc. They should carve out a policy space where the trans-local
    > trade is encouraged only for goods that cannot be produced
    > locally. They should provide accounting models in alternative
    > currencies that address the problem of unequal purchasing power
    > and support localization of economy. On the other side, the agent
    > of the technological development process should also be
    > self-determining producer, technologist and consumer communities
    > who form multi-stakeholder associations and cooperatives, or form
    > civil-public partnerships with public entities, pursuing the goals
    > of globally collaborative development and localized deployment of
    > new production technologies. Through localization of consumption,
    > these communities can drive the demand and contribute financing,
    > while the cooperative model of organization can instill elements
    > of economic democracy into the localized production.

By reducing the geographic scale and intensity of production on the one
hand, and by scaling up and trans-localizing the work on research and
innovation on the other, these measures are tailored to lower the
dependence of both socio-metabolic processes and processes of
technological innovation on the global systems of commodity production.
However, the feasibility of these measures hinges on their insertion
into the anti-systemic strategies that are able to self-organize
production and/or can influence policy on various levels of the
political system. They are particularly suited for a troubled
(semi-)periphery, where social movements and organized labor have a
degree of know-how, some financial means to pursue them, outreach to the
public decision-making process and a historic chance to articulate an
alternative trajectory of social development. They are not a silver
bullet, but they are a potential fall-back should the post-capitalist
tomorrow dawn. If social and political movements fail to understand that
technology conditions the transition, and that a cautious
reconfiguration of our technological systems should be a part of their
strategic register, judging by the experience of real existing
socialisms, the day after the transition will increasingly start to
revert back to the day before.

[^1]: Anna Lowenhaupt Tsing, *The Mushroom at the End of the World: On
    The Possibility of Life in Capitalist Ruins* (Princeton: Princeton
    University Press, 2015) 19.

[^2]: *Earth Overshoot Day*. http://www.overshootday.org/

[^3]: Varying footprints by nations can be explored at: "Ecological
    Wealth of Nations," Global Footprint Network
    http://www.footprintnetwork.org/ecological\_footprint\_nations/

[^4]: Koko Warner et al., “In Search of Shelter: Mapping the Effects of
    Climate Change on Human Migration and Displacement,” *Center for
    International Earth Science Information Network*, Earth Institute,
    Columbia University (2009):

[^5]: “World Food Situation,” *Food and Agriculture Organization of the
    United Nations*, 2015,
    http://www.fao.org/worldfoodsituation/foodpricesindex/en/

[^6]: Will Steffen et al., “The Anthropocene: Conceptual and Historical
    Perspectives,” *Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society of
    London A: Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences* 369.1938
    (March 13, 2011): 842–67.

[^7]: Lewis Mumford, *The Myth of the Machine: Technics and Human
    Development* (San Diego, CA: Harcourt Brace Jovanovich, 1967).

[^8]: For a telling analysis of technology’s contribution to inequality
    from no foes of technocapitalism see Erik Brynjolfsson and Andrew
    McAfee, *Race Against the Machine: How the Digital Revolution Is
    Accelerating Innovation, Driving Productivity, and Irreversibly
    Transforming Employment and the Economy* (Lexington, Mass: Digital
    Frontier Press, 2012), ch. 3.

[^9]: Robert Brenner, *The Economics of Global Turbulence: The Advanced
    Capitalist Economies from Long Boom to Long Downturn, 1945-2005*
    (New York: Verso, 2006); Gopal Balakrishnan, “Speculations on the
    Stationary State,” *New Left Review* 59 (2009): 5–26; Wolfgang
    Streeck, “How Will Capitalism End?,” *New Left Review* 87 (2014):
    35–64.

[^10]: The world consumption of energy has in fact grown almost three
    times since the 1970s, see the first graph here: “World Energy
    Consumption Since 1820 in Charts,” *Our Finite World*, 13 March,
    2012,
    https://ourfiniteworld.com/2012/03/12/world-energy-consumption-since-1820-in-charts/

[^11]: Robin Wigglesworth and Eric Platt, “Value of Negative-Yielding
    Bonds Hits \$13.4tn,” *Financial Times*, August 12, 2016,
    http://www.ft.com/cms/s/0/973b6060-60ce-11e6-ae3f-77baadeb1c93.html

[^12]: Serge Latouche, *Farewell to Growth* (Cambridge, UK: Polity,
    2009), 8.

[^13]: Theory of unequal exchange expounded here, initially developed by
    Arghiri Emmanuel, in his *Unequal Exchange: A Study of the
    Imperialism of Trade* (London: New Left Books, 1972), has been
    adopted in environmental economics not only to explain economic, but
    also resulting environmental inequalities at the global scale – see
    in particular Alf Hornborg, *Global Magic: Technologies of
    Appropriation from Ancient Rome to Wall Street* (New York: Springer,
    2016).

[^14]: Arghiri Emmanuel, *Appropriate or Underdeveloped Technology?*
    (London: John Wiley & Sons, 1982).

[^15]: Jason W. Moore, *Capitalism in the Web of Life: Ecology and the
    Accumulation of Capital* (New York: Verso Books, 2015).

[^16]: Nicholas Georgescu-Roegen, “The Entropy Law and the Economic
    Process in Retrospect,” *Eastern Economic Journal* 12.1 (1986):
    3–25; Hornborg, *Global Magic*, 26.

[^17]: Thomas Parke Hughes, *Networks of Power: Electrification in
    Western Society, 1880-1930* (Baltimore: Johns Hopkins University
    Press, 1993).

[^18]: Kevin Anderson and Glen Peters, “The Trouble with Negative
    Emissions,” *Science* 354.6309 (14 October, 2016): 182–83.

[^19]: “Schwarze Pumpe Power Station,” *Wikipedia*, 7 October, 2016,
    https://en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Schwarze\_Pumpe\_power\_station&oldid=743035152

[^20]: Anderson and Peters, “The Trouble with Negative Emissions”.

[^21]: Quirin Schiermeier, “Combined Climate Pledges of 146 Nations Fall
    Short of 2 °C Target,” *Nature News*, 30 October, 2015,
    http://www.nature.com/news/combined-climate-pledges-of-146-nations-fall-short-of-2-c-target-1.18693

[^22]: Peter J. Loftus et al., “A Critical Review of Global
    Decarbonization Scenarios: What Do They Tell Us about Feasibility?,”
    *Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change* 6.1 (2015):
    93–112..

[^23]: For an overview of various dimensions of the technology debate
    within the degrowth movement see Linda Nierling, “A Normative
    Framework for the Development and Use of Technologies in the
    Degrowth Context,” Degrowth Conference, Leipzig, 2014,
    https://www.degrowth.info/en/catalogue-entry/a-normative-framework-for-the-development-and-use-of-technologies-in-the-degrowth-context/

[^24]: The notion of “competing modes of production” was proposed and
    developed by Michael Lebovitz; see *The Contradictions of “Real
    Socialism”: The Conductor and the Conducted* (New York: NYU Press,
    2012).

[^25]: Michel Bauwens and Vasilis Kostakis, *Network Society and Future
    Scenarios for a Collaborative Economy* (London, New York: Palgrave
    Macmillan, 2015).
